On license plates, followed by a
confirmatory adoptions and we'll
start with those three, and I
think we'll probably get um into
several others after that. So
Sarah Hickey, uh,
119, please. And is there any
opposition to this bill? I'm
guessing there's none, right,
thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
last year, uh, passed
unanimously through 3 committees
and only 1 negative vote in the
4th committee and it went
through the floors and got to
the governor's desk and his
pocket reader, right, and that's
probably why it's heard up first
and we're moving it quickly, but
please be expeditious with your
time. You've got 3 other people
who wish to speak on it, but we
need to make some progress. So
no opposition. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair and committee
members, uh, this bill, uh,
requests taking $25 million to
add to the bioscience uh
development funder act and the
bioscience Authority at the
University of New Mexico. It's a
public public body corporation,
the state of the has an attached
501c3, the guts of the bill are
essentially the same, although
with a um
Uh, a few things from the
governor's office, um, first of
all, the co-investor has to do 2
times the amount of the
investment as would come from uh
this fund. It has to be 5 years
in New Mexico and has to have 5
employees with the minimum of
60K. It's kind of a, a jobs bill
to a certain extent that also
very importantly will advance
the state as a bioscience center
in um uh
research,
uh, I have with me Paul Lauer,
who is the chair of the board,
Stephanie Tofigi, who is the
executive director and David
Perkins, who is president of the
corporation, and with that, I
stand for questions. Thank you.
Do you want to have anybody
speaking to you on the
presentation? Are you I did I
hit all the key points.
OK.
We have a Cangelosi, Coglin, and
O'Rourke all on Zoom, all
recognize each of them for one
minute.
Um, did you want anybody else on
your panel to speak and add
anything, sir?
I, I think to, to
The brevity of the bill, um, we,
we can hold that off. All right,
and I don't see anybody on Zoom
ready to go, so we're gonna go
to committee members. Oh,
there's Mr. Cangelosi, I'm
sorry. I was in you're listening
you're shown by zoom.
Mr. Chair.
Hello, Mr. Chair and committee
members, um, Ryan Cangelosi
University of New Mexico Health
Sciences and also a part of the
Bioscience Authority was a part
of its creation in 2017.
And this is a bill that not only
will create jobs for New Mexico,
grow a very emerging bioscience,
biotech, uh industry here in New
Mexico. The most importantly,
it's an evergreen fund that when
we invest into a company, we
have equity in the company as a
company does well, we get money
back that goes right back into
the fund to invest in other
bioscience companies. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Who, who are you sir?
Oh, I'm, I'm sorry you're on
Zoom too. Wow, we're showing up
in person, go ahead, you're
recognized for a minute, sir.
Thank you. For your time, um.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
um, I definitely support this
bill since it allows startup and
growing businesses in the state
and would be more proactive in
helping this job placement with
educational focus at the higher
ed centers in the state and at
the same time um allows direct
support for startup companies in
in the biotech field in the
state to actually really form
and help and develop an
ecosystem. All right. Thank you.
And I had Mr. O'Rourke, but
you're not here either, right?
All right.
OK, many members, questions,
Senator Dewey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I think
we heard Senator Hickey say that
the intention with the, the
60,000 have.
Great jobs. I think you said
minimum of 60,000. Right now it
says average of 60,000. So if
you have 5 employees with an
average of 60,000, 1 person
could be getting 220,000 and the
other four could be getting
20,000.
Um, so I'd like to change, uh,
so page 5, line 4.
And line 11.
change both instances of average
to median.
If the, the goal here is to be
creating high wage jobs, then
we're a lot more likely to
achieve that by taking the
median approach rather than an
average one.
Any other discussion committee
members? That's friendly.
There any objection?
The moments adopted.
But Senator doing anything else?
That's all.
Committee members, others?
Who was?
Um
Well done.
Yes.
Senator Thurton.
Uh
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair. So
I'm, I'm catching up to speed on
this, and so I guess my first
question is.
So the bioscience Authority.
How are they going to evaluate
these uh potential investors
that invest in this.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thornton,
uh, my name is Paul. I'm the
chair of the bioscience
Authority and uh this is a, uh,
co-investment bill, so we would
um allow uh venture capital
groups to come to us with, uh,
with vetted deals that we would
rely on their expertise. Uh we
also have, uh, board expertise
in biotech. I have a biotech
company myself and uh uh Doctor
Coughlin also has a very
successful uh bi.
Company here and uh we would uh
do our, our vetting and there's
uh guidelines laid out in this
bill, what, what we, how we
would rate the companies that
were brought to us.
And we would, um,
Um, make a decision to either
approve a an investment.
Uh, or not. And then, uh, it
would still have to be signed
off by the Secretary of Finance
and Administration as well as
economic development secretary.
Before the funds are released.
OK.
Thank you for that
Senator Cervantes and Senator
Thornton, um, just to add to
that, we have done a pilot
program of this bill. Um, we
have done an RFP to be able to
solicit um private investors
that want to partner with us so
that we have a criteria to
follow, um, to be, um, used to
figure out who we're going to
invest with. And then we've also
had experience once those
partnerships have been made once
those MOAs have been signed to
be able to
actually invest in a company,
um, then Ubio was the company
that we invested in in
collaboration with New Mexico
Angels.
But we also have another
partner, Anzoo Partners, who is
an external company that is much
larger than New Mexico Angels.
They are $500 million fund that
is interested in co-investing
with us. Um, they've just said
that we have to have a minimum
of $500,000 for them to be able
to invest with.
Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair, just one other question,
my understanding and and someone
can correct me if I'm wrong that
the New Mexico Finance Authority
has
About $900 million in.
Private equity investment
programs, and they also have a
new $50 million venture capital
program.
So my question is, you know, why
aren't we tapping into that as
opposed to creating our own.
Can you help me with that, uh,
Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Thornton, um, we don't really
want to tap into that. We want
to increase our investment
capabilities. Um, and the
bioscience area is a separate
area, so it makes sense to put
it there rather than in one of
these other authorities. I
actually sponsored the 50
million in the venture capital
over 2 years. Uh, they have some
very different criteria. They're
more rurally focused and uh I
think it's the
I see that has the other 900
million and they have uh similar
general criteria, but, um,
again, this is, this is for
bioscience in particular,
because that's where the
expertise is.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr. Chair, I
guess my other question is I,
I'm all for this. I think it's
a, it's a great idea, and my
only other concern is that there
are lots of other areas of
investment AI and things like
that that we could participate
in and, and so
We could easily start seeing a a
bunch of sectors coming through
asking for similar types of, you
know, equity funding, if you
will. And so that's my only
concern because I think there
are a lot of potentially new
areas coming up now in this, in
this, in our current world and
so, uh, but I have no problem
with bioscience. I, I'm just
thinking it's, may not be the
only one that other things that
New Mexico could also get
involved.
Mr. Thornton and my expert.
I think. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Senator Thornton. Um, so
that is what we envision,
actually. So we are the
bioscience Authority, um, we are
the first of our, um, you know,
division to be created to
champion a specific.
Um
You know, economic development
angle that has been identified
by the state as being means of
diversifying the economy. Um, we
understand that there are many
others, and we hope to serve as
that example that they can then
follow, um, aerospace is
interested in following our lead
to do the many of the same
things that we're doing. Um,
it's just a matter of, you know,
putting those experts together
and being able to make, um,
unified decisions for this, you
know, on behalf of the state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thanks
you mentioned aerospace. Now you
just touched my heart. I'm a
retired aerospace engineer, so
thank you very much.
Thank you chair. I just wanted
to bring up an item, this would
be um
On page 7, beginning on line 22.
Um,
As we were talking about.
Um, return on investment and
things like that. So,
If we look at the what is the
next page 8.
Lines 1 and 2, to accept stock.
And requiring entity in lieu of
a cash payment, and that seems
very risky. I mean, in terms of
value of stock. I don't know why
we just wouldn't leave it.
Uh, cash payment.
Um, Mr. Cameron and, uh,
Senator, um,
The biotech industry is um can
be incredibly profitable.
Um, and stock uh can be very
valuable and the value of that
stock is usually done by a third
party company, so that it's
there is in the eyes of the IRS
and uh and uh so.
Uh, stock would be an option if
the company has a great
potential, a great upside.
Uh, because that money then once
the company goes public or it's
bought out, uh, that money
reverts back into the fund, so
that we grow the fund, um, based
on the success of these
companies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I guess
what I'm saying is if, if it
doesn't, right, if it doesn't
match what the
Cash payment would be or the,
you know, what you're borrowing.
Then, uh, I could see obviously
if it were worth more or the
same or more.
But if it's not, then we're not
getting uh the, you know, we're
not getting a return.
So that would be my concern.
And so, I'm not exactly sure
what to do about that.
Any suggestions?
Senator.
I'm asking her.
Yes.
Perfect.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Hickey, um, just on that on page
8, I was just going over the
penalty or the employment
restrictions rather and it.
On lines 15 through 20, which
does a couple of things. One is
that
This violation of Section A is a
4th degree felony.
Um, and then an allegation may
be reported to the AG or the DA.
Um
I think this language works, I
mean.
When you create a new crime,
it's usually a misdemeanor.
If this were to be
On the DA's desk or the district
court's desk, it would, um,
It probably wouldn't get any
time and attention, you know,
when you're dealing with
murderers and rapists and, you
know, all that stuff. But I
think the fact that it's in
there, and if these companies,
assuming they're competent, they
they would be aware of this, and
they wouldn't do that.
I think it, it serves its
intended goal, and we usually
don't say.
You know, this crime may be.
Alleged to the deer that or the
attorney general, but I don't
think there's a problem there
either. The Attorney general is
not a prosecutor, they just play
one on TV every 4 years. We
have, you know, 14 competent DAs
in the state, uh, that are
outstanding prosecutors, so you
really got to think of the DAs
as the prosecutors and the
attorney general is the lawyer
for the for state government.
But anyway, thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, based on
the my what I brought up and my
concern, um,
I would like to uh
an amendment, and this would be
on page 8.
Uh, line 2.
Um
And just after cash payment, I
think we would delete the period
and the um quote.
Continue if the value of the
stock would be equal or greater
than the amount the business
must compensate, period.
I would like to move that
amendment.
OK.
Oh
Right. This would be a page 8,
line 2.
Uh, at the end uh of the line to
where it says uh dust is payment
uh delete the period and the
quote mark and continue as
With the language if the value
of the stock would be equal or
greater than the amount the
business must compensate,
period.
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, could
you repeat what you're saying so
we can put this in language that
that's understandable and fits
into.
Sorry.
To
OK.
So, again, I uh
Page 8, line 2.
Uh,
before the period.
Uh, we would, it would just
continue with the language.
Uh, beginning with if the value
of the stock would be equal to
or greater than
The amount the business must
compensate, period.
uh, and the committee secretary,
did you get that language? OK.
Yes, that's friendly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll move
on.
Thank you.
Anybody else?
Please, yes, my.
Uh, thank you, Mr. I, I do have
concern about the 4th degree
felony. This is a new provision
that was not in the bill 2 years
ago, um, I, I just
There's all kinds of collateral
consequences that come with a
4th degree felony. It's an 18
months versus a year as a
misdemeanor, I'd be much more
comfortable with us changing
this to we typically don't.
With a new crime, start with a
4th degree felony. So I just
Again, I, I would propose a
change to take that from a 4th
degree felony to a misdemeanor,
unless there's a really good
reason that that this should be
treated somehow differently. And
I did look in 2023, this is a
new, there's, there's a number
of new sections that weren't
part of the bill that went
through before. And this was not
in the previous.
Bill, so again, I certainly
yield to all of you for some
thoughts on that.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
these were put in, uh, because
we wanted to make sure the
governor was OK with uh with the
bill. Uh, I've spoken to her,
I've spoken to her chief of
staff, I've spoken to our
economic development, uh,
advisor.
These aren't specific requests,
it's just they they're, they
raised a concern about uh
potential conflict of interest
and how do we avoid even the
Even the appearance of a
conflict. So I do agree with
you, I think it, it may be over
overkill to, to just, you know.
So Mr. Chair, I would move on
page 8 line 17, we strike 4th
degree felony.
And put in place of a
misdemeanor.
And then I believe the section
I'd asked Mr. Laragote or staff
to help. I believe it's 30-1-6B,
which is the provision for a
misdemeanor. Uh, so strike on
line 18.
31-1815 and replaced it with
30-1-6B, uh, which is the
section for a misdemeanor, and
it, and it's a year, up to a
year penalty, it's just not a
felony, which I just think in
this case it makes sense unless
I'm happy to have a discussion
on that.
Quick discussion. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator Worth. You know
what, keep in mind.
You can get quicker justice on a
misdemeanor, you can charge
somebody today, drag them into
court in a month, convict him in
23 months, felony, that's gonna
take you a year to get indicted,
so just wanted to make that
point. Thank you. We're on the
amendment. Is there any
objection to the adoption of the
amendment? The sponsor says it's
acceptable.
It's maybe not quite so tough on
crime upstairs would like, but
uh.
We're gonna, we're gonna take
the amendments, so. All right,
uh, see no objection to the
amendments adopted, taking it to
a misdemeanor.
Others?
Um, I'm gonna respectfully, um,
oppose the bill this year. I'd
just like to give my reasons in
advance. I think New Mexico is
increasingly, and this is not a
reflection on anyone who
supports us at all. New Mexico's
increasingly and notoriously
gullible to um the uh economic
projections of various
investments in substantial
amounts of money that don't
really promise. This doesn't
have a clawback provision in my
mind, I mean, it sort of does,
but not really. Uh, it says
that, you know, uh, and it's got
things that I don't think are
really probably lawful. So, for
example, if you look on page 7,
says if there's a bankruptcy
proceeding involving the company
or liquidation claimed by the
authority shall be paid for.
That's not the way it works.
That's not bankruptcy law, they
don't get to get paid first just
by saying it's in the statute.
Um, that's just one of the flaws
with this way of thinking
because, as I said, New Mexico
is kind of notoriously gullible
for these optimistic
projections, so if you do the
math on this, if the bill was to
go as it's as it's presented, it
would be an appropriation of
what are we talking about? $25
million and the only requirement
is to have, I think, 5 jobs uh
for 5 years.
The, the economics of that, even
if you don't go into the
principle, meaning that each job
is costing us about $350,000 a
year, uh, for a job that has to
pay $60,000 a year. So you're a
businessman, Senator, there's
not many of us left in here, but
when you do the math, you're
laughing, but it's, it's, it is
ludicrous, right, that we're
gonna spend that kind of money
to, for 5 jobs that are gonna
pay $60,000 when it's costing
the state at our typical
investment rate of maybe 7%,
which each job is costing
$350,000 to pay somebody $50,000
now I understand. The promise is
the
The economy will boom as a
result of all of this and all
kinds of other things will
happen. That's always the
argument that's made Las Cruces
years ago I bought into the
spaceport, uh, we're still
paying for that. Um, we're
paying, we invested about $250
million as a state, and that's
just that money and the local
communities invested, um,
probably 100 million more, and
we're getting a million dollars
a year as the lease payment on
that because there's no launches
going on. So, uh, you'll smile
again, you're a businessman, a
return on investment is about
4/10 of 1% on the spaceport.
investment.
We're doing it all the time. Uh,
I see Senator Hamlin out there a
couple of years ago. We had a
nice announcement for a big film
production studio coming to Las
Cruces. I was there, I don't
know if you were there or not. A
28 productions, they were gonna
film their first production in
May of 2022, that we're going to
invest $100 million with high
paying jobs in Las Cruces. We
put Lita money into it. The city
of Las Cruces put money into the
government, governor came down
at $3 million ribbon cutting the
whole bit and Senator, you and I
are out there. There's no,
there's nothing but a stone
turned, right? Um, and the first
production was supposed to
happen.
at the end of 2022, um, they
were bringing 100 high paying
jobs at the time. Uh, I can give
you countless examples. Hemp,
marijuana, film, you name it,
Spaceport, uh, New Mexico is
incredibly vulnerable. And I'm
not saying this is that type of
a project, but I think we have
to be a lot wiser when it comes
down to investment of public
resources, and again, um, I'm
not seeing a claw back here, uh,
and so I think that there's
probably some bankruptcy
provisions that don't work, as I
said, but, but, um
If you look at page 7, if they,
if the business fails to do, it
says they have to reimburse the
authority. I'm looking at line
7, reimburse the authority.
For the biodevelopment funds
cost basis. You don't define
what cost basis is. Those of us
in business have an idea what
cost basis is, but that doesn't
have anything to do with the
investment amount, right? Um,
and so the state may be
investing what is, whatever it
is again, $25 million. Um, in
the meantime, that money can pay
salaries, including oftentimes
CEO salaries and others, uh,
sometimes attractive salaries,
and then the state gets what
back? Um, the cost basis, I
don't know what that is because
it's not defined. And if the
business is bankrupt or or out
of business, may get nothing
back.
Uh, Senator O'Malley raised the
right point, we might get the
stock value back, but well, this
is what's the stock value?
Spaceport's the greatest example
I've ever seen. It was
brilliant, really, which is uh
uh Sir Richard made a fortune
because he took it public and
rode the stock price up to about
$65. I, I bought into the stock
at about 50 to show my support
for economic development in New
Mexico, and I was fortunate to
sell it on the way down to about
$45 a share. It's now about $4 a
share. So, uh, we're, we're
suckers in the state for, for a,
for a good, and again, you're,
you're bearing the brunt of my
My overall observation, again,
I'm not suggesting that's what's
going to happen here. I hope
not. I think you got the boats
and I, I think you'll probably
make some success with this, but
we do this all the time, we
invest money in ways that really
are just not very uh cost
effective to us as uh state
taxpayers and people who
understand finance and
economics, and so I, I, I
respectful, you won't have to,
you're, you're welcome to answer
my questions or comments, but I
won't be supporting the bill for
the simple reason this makes as
much sense as Spaceport didn't I
didn't support that either, and
I think I was the only.
Legislator who didn't support
spaceport, so here we are today.
Senator, go ahead.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for
those comments. They're very
insightful, but I'm hoping you
get your $3000 deduction every
year for the loss on the
spaceport that you took the um
Uh, I, I, I, I'm not saying that
you're wrong. I mean, investment
is risk reward, um, but the in,
in private equity, the saying
goes, it's the jockey, not the
horse.
And the jockeys here are very,
very good in bioscience. And so
that's why I have the confidence
in the bill.
Mr. Chair, I thought it was a
$300,000 investment. Yeah,
you, you're talking about
spaceport? What?
00 so Richard, well, I, I think,
I think he didn't have to pay
anything into getting the
investment. We bought the, we
bought the land, we bought the
facility, we built it, uh, Tony
had to pay taxpayers are paying
for it still today. I think he's
referring to your investment in
the stock and your loss at 3000.
I think it was $300,000. I got
it. I didn't tell you how many
shares I bought, so it was not a
big investment in space work
only because I had a pretty good
idea where that was going, but
I, I did want to watch the stock
carefully in my buy the stock, I
watched the stock carefully, so,
um.
Uh, no, nothing like that, but
anyway, um, I think the point's
made, and I hope you all do well
and I hope you uh do something
different than just about every
other uh investment I see with
the state buys into um a very uh
optimistic dreams if you know or
or very gullible, uh, optimistic
hopes and expectations, and we,
I think we as a state can do
better. We can invest in things
that we know are really going to
work, and this may be one of
those centers. Thank you all
very much for that. I just
wanted to thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I
appreciate being your soapbox.
Well, I, uh, you won't be the
only one. I'll get it all the
time whenever we start looking
at lead, you name it. So we're
on a do do we have a do pass
motion that's amended.
There's a motion for do pass as
amended. Uh, any objection to
the Du pass motion, show me and
are doing.
Senator Brantley, or Paul, son
of Thornton. What is that?
We're fine. Um I'm sorry, that's
not a new pass.
That's, that's that motion did
not prevail. Alternate motion.
Anyone? Oh boy, we're gonna go
see the senator from Senator
Finance chairman. I'll, I'll
move the table. So Mr. Chair, I,
I'll move a uh due pass with no
recommendation.
Uh, given that we're talking
about financial issues, it's not
the judicial issue and a
clawback, I think it's sort of a
traditional issue. Just try a
different motion.
I appreciate that, so the motion
is uh do pass with no
recommendation do pass it as
amended with no recommendation.
All right. Uh, any, any
discussion on that motion at
all?
I'll just jump in with, you
know, I'm not fond of doing so,
particularly because I think the
bankruptcy provision here and so
forth are things this committee
should address, not a finance
committee. I just don't think
that that's legal. I don't think
we can do that, but in any
event, we're on a do pass motion
with no recommendation. Let's do
it on roll call this time.
And we.
Yes.
OK,
yes.
Senator O'Malley.
And call
There
I work
Yes, please.
No,
you do pass with no
recommendation.
Thank you standing up there.
That was the easy one for today,
OK? Uh, Senate Bill 128. Senator
Doug, you said you're gonna do
that one for us.
Sarah Hamlin, I was looking at
you a lot on that last
presentation. You've been here
for all those, right?
Have you seen anything moved out
there at all?
We're going on 2 years, right?
Yeah,
not, not fair. I wonder how much
money they've collected so far.
they doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, Mr.
Chair.
Um
There are folks who request
personalized license plates
that.
Say inappropriate things.
Glorify violence or drugs or use
profanity, um, right now, TRD
has a policy that allows them to
reject that, uh, they have seen
in some states that people are
challenging that on a First
Amendment right on basis. I
think that if that challenge
happens here, we'll be in a
better position if it's in
statute. So that's what this
does. I don't think that would
be a successful First Amendment
challenge. I don't think you can
compel the state to produce
profanity for you. You can have
whatever bumper stickers you
want on your car, um.
But this would simply codify
that policy so that if that
First Amendment challenge does
come, we are in a better
position to resist it.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, do we
have anyone registered in
support or opposition? None. Um,
all right. So there being no one
registered to speak in
opposition or support were on
Senate 128 to the committee
members. Excuse me. Anyone?
No.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think,
um, you know, the last page of.
Where it talks about uh line 16
and it becomes it says things
like to be derogatory, offensive
or misleading obscene vulgar. I
think the only thing with that,
I, I, I agree that we should not
um use public funds for um
derogatory license plates, etc.
offensive, but I think
Uh, what offensive to whom I
think that's the thing, it's,
you know, I did see a list of,
of uh
That was, that was provided by
the senator, and actually I
didn't understand most of it, so
I didn't even know. So, um, I'm
assuming that that's just left
up to the interpretation.
Uh, to what's obscene by
The uh the oh.
Oh, who's gonna make that
decision, the division? Yes?
Yes, The group for there's gonna
be a.
Sorry, um, Mr. Chair, I guess
it's gonna be a group of folks
at the division that's gonna
Beside that.
That would only be my concern.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just had a
quick clarifying question, um,
kind of to Senator O'Malley's
point, so there's somebody
that's going to make a decision
on whether it's obscene, vulgar,
is there, if it's something that
Is not, is there an appeal
process for that, for somebody
requesting one. I just, I don't,
you know, I can't think of words
that don't exist today that
might come up to get put on a
license plate with.
And, and Mr. Chair senator, so
there's no appeal process now
and this, this would not create
one. I'll tell you that, so when
I got the list of rejected ones,
cause the reason I agreed to do
this bill is cause I thought it
would be really funny to read
out the rejected ones and, in
committee, it turns out I am not
that brave. Um, I also did not
under, did not know what most of
them meant. Uh, I had to use
urban dictionary to look them up
and then immediately regretted
doing so, but apparently that is
what they do at
The the person who is in charge
of approving these requests for
plates. One of the first things
they do is run it through Urban
Dictionary and see what pops up.
Thank you. No further questions.
OK. Anyone else?
Soma. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Doig, the, um, I get it
now with the urban dictionary
and all the acronyms and stuff,
but on on line 16.
You think, you think MD uh.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Do, do you
think MVD could do its task just
as good.
Without line 16.
I think, I think line 17,
obscene vulgar, sexually
explicit, profane.
I, I think that would capture.
What some would consider
derogatory or offensive or
mislead.
But
You think that's important to
have that line in there.
Senator, what I, what I
understand they're trying to
capture with that, maybe not
with misleading, but the
derogatory or offensive is um
racial slurs and um a lot of
like white supremacy stuff.
That, that, that was the example
that that I was pointed to for
capture. Thank you for that, Mr.
Senator, Senator, Mr. Chairman,
the, uh, so this is the, the
actual NBD license plate
attached to the vehicle, right?
It's not a plate you put on the
front.
For the fun of it, so.
Because if someone had like a
cowboy's number one, that would
obviously be misleading.
All right, thank you.
Others, anyone else?
All right, um, yeah, I just, uh,
I, I think we're gonna have to
rely on the agency, but um the
just the lights plate cannot
promote drugs.
Or intoxicating substances, um,
or alcohol, so I guess that's
gonna rule out the weed stuff
and all that.
OK.
Yeah, and uh,
I'm looking at uh.
Profane. I, I don't know what
profane is either, but like
again, I give up to rely on the
the uh agency.
Like I said in a committee
earlier today in your committee,
I think I use the word bullshit,
which I shouldn't use and I'm
sorry and I apologize for saying
bullshit, but um, but, but, um,
but I, I guess some, some people
think that I'm full of bullshit,
but um I guess I can't use it on
oh it comes up on the screen,
oops.
Uh,
anyway, I, I, you know, again,
we're getting rid of that
problem right is what is
profane. I see cars with bumper
stickers and things on their
cars and to me it's disturbing,
but I understand that sometimes
they have the right to do some
of those things too, so we'll
see that. Um, the only other
thing that I was confused about,
Senator, and maybe you know the
answer to this is on that page
2, line 3.
Say no two owners shall have
plates. This is plates that
cannot be easily differentiated.
You know what that's about?
Yes, Mr. Chair, and the only
example is popping into my head.
Probably would not be allowed by
the rest of these, so if you had
B00BS or B O B S.
They both look the same and they
are hard for, uh, for law
enforcement to distinguish. OK,
so O's and
OK. All right. OK.
Senator, yes, thank you.
And, and Senator, I do have a
concern here. I just looked up
my own license plate, send 35,
and according to Urban
Dictionary, it's saying it's an
emo boy with broken news who
can't pull girls, so is my plate
gonna be rejected?
I mean, Mr. Chair,
maybe, I, I don't know there's a
lot of stuff on Urban Dictionary
that I, I need to work with you
on a, on an appeals process.
Yeah. And, and thank you, thank
you. Thank you, sitter,
you're gonna have a hard time
figuring out the quote of the
day with you. Your last one was
pretty good, though, too pretty
for prison, I thought you
couldn't not do yourself, but
you've outdone yourself for
there, uh, we're on a do pass
motion if somebody will make it.
Uh, Senator Brantley with a DuP
pass motion. No amendment set at
Bill 128. Is there objection?
See, there's a due pass on set
at 128.
Oh, Senator Thorne, yes, Senator
Thorn. Uh, all others here
present voting in the
affirmative, there's that do
pass there.
Uh, let's do, give me just one
second, um.
Senator,
let me do a couple of things.
Senator Bradley, uh, Brigmans,
who's gonna do the CYFD federal
benefits. Are you? I thought,
I'm sorry, I wanted to keep you
down there.
OK.
So, Mr. Chair.
Um, about a year ago, we heard.
That CYFD was using federal
benefits that folks in their
custody would get, uh, survivors
benefits, things like that to
pay, help pay for the costs of,
uh, the care they were getting
by being in custody of the
state. Uh, this is something
that actually a ton of states
around the country did.
Um, at the time we heard from
the secretary, we're going to
stop doing this. And she issued
a
Can't remember what it's called.
It's on executive order, but she
issued a directive saying we're
not going to do this anymore.
Turns out they're still doing
it.
Um, and so we need to put into
law that they not, um, what this
bill would do, it would do a
couple of things. It would,
first of all, make sure that
when someone comes into CYFD
custody that they check to see
if they are entitled to any of
these benefits and apply for
them if they have not been
applied for already, um, it then
makes CYFD the receiver of last
resort instead of first resort.
So if there is
And the representative payee,
I'm sorry, of last resort.
Uh, because if there is someone
else who appropriate in that
child's life, who should be that
representative payee, then it
should be them, not not CYFD.
And it says that you can't use
CYFD, you can't use those
benefits, uh, to pay for or
reimburse yourself for the cost
of the child's care, unless
there to meet us there for the
child's unmet needs that go
beyond what the department is
obligated or required or to or
has agreed to pay already.
So there's still for.
Extraordinary expenses, uh, that
would not otherwise be covered
by the department, they could be
used, but not otherwise.
And then when the child is going
to come out of state custody,
uh, they get some financial
literacy training, so that they
know that they have a a basis to
to manage these funds that
they're, that have been held for
their benefit until that time.
It also requires reporting to us
on the number of children in
custody who are getting the
benefits, uh, the type of the
benefits and how they're being
conserved for them, uh, and the
amounts so that we as a body,
uh, know what's going on with,
with these funds.
I'm here for moral support for
Senator Duha, but it's that,
it's that straightforward, that
was common practice before 2023.
Uh, thank you to the CYFD
secretary who is not practicing
it now, but it's not because
it's not in statute.
You hear? OK. No, you don't need
to, don't want to do it. All
right, uh, disability rights.
Uh, anyway, you spell it right,
yeah, Gary, you wanna say
anything? You have to come up to
the microphone if you do.
I'll recognize you for up to a
minute and a half.
So
Gary Alpi CEO of Disability
Rights New Mexico, just very
briefly, this is something we
can do for kids in foster care.
We know all the issues they're
facing kids who come out of
foster care need funds and need
financial stability, 30% end up
being homeless. 65, a high
percentage are vulnerable to
identity theft while they're in
the system. So this is a great
Uh
great provision that the centers
have gone forward with to help
provide some stability for these
kids and the funds that they'll
need.
while they're in custody and
after they leave custody.
Thank you very much. Anyone
else?
Members of the committee.
Questions, comments, anyone?
Senator Thornton, yes, Mr.
Chair, thank you very much for
bringing this forward. It seems
like a really good deal.
What percentage of cases has
this occurred in the past where,
where the children are.
Not properly taken care of and,
and the state has had to take
care of their financial.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, uh,
Thornton, 11% of the children in
our New Mexico foster care
system receive those federal
benefits and astonishingly, the
average monthly benefit is
around $700 a month.
It's estimated that it's about
150 children within the system
today.
Has this been going on for?
Eternity since the beginning of
CYFD. Mr. Chari has been going
on for a very long time and to
be fair, it was going on in a
very long for a very long time
across the nation. It wasn't
just here. Um, but now the, uh,
federal Social Security
Administration has said, um,
He states, stop doing that.
OK, thank you. I think that's
all my questions.
Again, appreciate doing this,
um, I remember when this
happened, uh, we were at an
interim committee meeting in
Riodoso and Center Ivy Soto
brought up the issue and and
what we're talking about here is
social security benefits, right,
so essentially what he was
saying, he brought up the fact
the secretary was there
fortunately, and he said, you
know what we're doing as a
state, I don't know who tipped
him off or.
Knowing him, he probably didn't
sleep for a few months and was
just reading Social Security
Act, I guess, but, but.
But Senator you Soto seriously
brought up the fact that the
CYFD was essentially taking the
Social Security benefits that
were being received by children
in their custody and utilizing
them. They were putting them
into their funding, uh,
applications, and we're not
retaining those for uh the
children or the beneficiaries.
That, that's I I I to her
credit, the secretary was
appalled to learn this at the
committee meeting and said she'd
do something about it
immediately, she to her good
credit came back at our next
meeting and said they had
discontinued and stopped it
immediately. It's something I
would have hoped they would have
caught on their own, but, but
she
did act very promptly when
learning of that. Um, I, I think
it's really terribly
unfortunate. In fact, I see he's
one of the lawyers who sometimes
uh is engaging the CYFD, um, in
my, in my mind, probably a good
lawsuit against CYFD to recover
those funds on behalf of those
miners, cause if I did that or,
and I like, I look at center,
center worth and I do cases
together and I frequently have
him act as essentially a
guardian or conservator for a
minor child.
Because we have an obligation
when we're representing a minor
child to make sure those
proceeds are retained for that
benefit of that child until they
reach adulthood, and otherwise,
mom, dad, or somebody else might
boost those monies, and there
have been lawsuits when the
child reaches maturity, there's
no money left, right? So, so
these funds should have been
retained by CFD for the benefit
of the child. I don't know if we
could ever go back and recreate
what they did with the money,
but um it's unfortunate, I'm
glad you're putting it into the
practice again, the good example
is a child who lost their
parents in a in a death and the
child's receiving.
Social Security benefits for the
loss of their parent, and the
money's going to CYFD to run the
program, uh, it's just no way to
run a government, so I'm glad
we're putting it into that with
this, with this law, and I'll
support it and everyone else to
do the same.
All right. Uh, the motion before
us.
The master or they do pass
motion.
Senator Thornton again, that's
all right, but you, you, you're
getting it when you wave off,
you, you know what I'm gonna say
next, right? No second required
for a motion in the committee.
All right, is there any
objection to the, uh, do pass
motion.
Sing Nan, there's a do pass.
Thank you both for that, Senator
Brantley, and they too. Um, I've
just been notified we just got a
proposed amendment
To Senate Bill 299, which would
strike all the Senate Rules
Committee amendments that I'm,
I'm gonna roll that bill over
for today, that's a substantive
amendment that really for us to
consider it takes us to look at
those Senate Rule Committee
amendments and consider them in
some context for us to just get
that right now, it's a little
too late, so we're gonna not
hear 299, that's the notice of
vacant legislative office seats.
Uh, let's see, where does that
put us? Let's do confirmatory
adoptions, Senate Bill 417.
Uh, Senator Stewart's not
present, but going to be
presented by Senator Hamlin,
right?
Thank you for being here.
Mr. Chair and committee, thank
you very much. I feel like I'm
sitting on a high chair right
now since we're so used to
seeing low, uh, in those chairs.
Um, Mr. Chair and committee, we
know that families can take all
forms from grandparents to
uncles and aunties to close
family friends, working together
to build and maintain solid
family environments, and in New
Mexico, we recognize and support
families in all forms. However,
traveling outside of our state,
many New Mexico families do not
have the security or comfort of
knowing their family unit is
protected or recognized, and
that's why Senate bill.
417 is so critical for us today.
Confirmatory adoption is a
simple process through which the
parents of a child can obtain a
court judgment declaring their
parental status. And I'd like to
remind you, you all met my
neighbor kid a couple of weeks
ago, Giovanna, um, who happens
to have two moms, and they went
to Big Bend last weekend.
Because they enjoy the outdoors
and visiting some of the amazing
sites and attractions throughout
the country. However, if they
were in an accident or ended up
in the hospital in another
state, they could be denied
access to their child. You
prevented from making medical
decisions for their, for her, or
could even be prevented from
leaving the hospital with their
own daughter. The thought of
this happening to her or any
other child terrifies me.
And through Senate Bill 417, her
family and many of our families
throughout the state that have
used assisted reproduction can
protect the integrity of their
family, even across state lines.
Confirmatory adoption provides a
critical safeguard for New
Mexico children, ensuring that
their legal family ties remain
intact wherever they go. My
experts today, they're not, they
aren't going to be um making uh
any statements unless there are
questions, but I have Marshall
Martinez, who is the executive
director for Equality New
Mexico, and Lynn Pearls, who is
a legal expert, uh, and
She is on Zoom, she'll be there
uh for questions only. And so at
this point, I, uh, welcome, uh,
any of the discussion, Mr. Chair
and committee.
Thank you, Mr. Martinez.
Anything to add?
Uh, no, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you very much. We don't
have anyone registered in
opposition for support, shock,
moaning, what's up?
I, uh, all right, we'll go to
committee members, questions and
comments.
21.
But there's a motion for do
pass. I, I just have a question
I don't have anyone else. Um,
with a confirmatory adoption, do
we ever run into a problem just
out of curiosity where you have,
uh, because we always think
there's going to be two parents,
I guess. Can you have multiple,
can you have 3 and 4
confirmatory adoptions, Mr.
Chair, I'm going to go ahead and
leave that to Lynn Pearls, uh,
who is on Zoom. She is the one
who would be able to answer
that. Lynn, do you mind
answering that question?
Absolutely not. Chairman
Cervantes, can you hear me? Yes.
And, and I'm not sure. Can you
see me? I'm, I don't have
something where it looks like I
can turn on my camera, but if
you can hear me, the answer is
it, yes, it, it, it's
conceivable. It doesn't happen
very often, but it would be
possible.
Yeah, we're, we're, we'd like to
double entendre there, uh.
Conceivable, I guess, but
uh, but, but, you know, it's a
serious question. I mean, you,
you raised the right question,
what happens, uh, when you have
multiple confirmatory adoptive
parents, and let's say there's a
difference of opinion about uh
an elective procedure, surgical,
medical, or other procedure. How
do you, how do you reconcile
those? I, I know you're not
trying to address those here,
they just, it raises the
question in my mind. I certainly
support what you're trying to
do, and I guess we'll have to
maybe do that with some other
legislation or the cases down
the road, but I, I could see a
circumstance where.
Jennifer and I've raised our
three daughters, and we don't
always agree about various
things, uh, and so we have to
work it out because there's not
a 3rd tiebreaker, but if there
was, it would be pretty
interesting, I think, uh, uh, if
there was a 3rd or 4th parent
involved in the parenting
process to be at the dinner
table during that time.
Yeah, I, I know where I'm gonna
come out,
all right, we're gonna do, do we
get to do pass motion, we do. Is
there any objection to do pass
motion? You have do pass. Thank
you.
there and congratulations to
Moni, who is now a mother,
parent, father, whatever.
The
Of course, and she's one of our
former staffers on the
committee. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We've tried to get
her back here a few times and
she thinks that she's got better
things to do.
Never
To
Senate Bill 65, Senator Dewey.
That's.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have
here with me today, uh, Rob
Trinan, who is a consumer
protection attorney and Mr.
Chair, there are
A lot of good.
Solar companies here in New
Mexico. Unfortunately, there are
also some bad ones, mostly from
out of state, but who go door to
door and target, uh, elderly
folks often, um, and, uh, poor
communities, and um,
Behave and they, they, they do
some predatory practices, uh,
and so I'd like to hand it over
to Mr. Trian to, to talk a
little bit more about what he
has seen in his practice, uh,
and but this bill overall is
looking to address the, the
predatory practices that that we
are seeing most often in this
context.
And I'm going to have a
amendment.
That I'd like to.
Uh, suggest, but I'll do that
after Mr. Try and speaks.
Mr. Chair, committee members.
So, um, Senator Doig's exactly
right. What this bill does is
just look at what we've seen as
the worst abuses that are being
done by the door to door sellers
of solar systems and prohibit
those.
And um
And like the senator said, there
are a lot of good companies out
there, there uh what we've seen
is the the the local New Mexico
companies tend to be good
companies.
Um, positive solar, affordable
solar companies like this, but
the out of state companies tend
not to be and, and have issues
because they're getting off
their.
Sales staff from
People that had been selling
alarms or meat out of meat
trucks, and they've they're,
they've gone into solar and
they're bringing some of those
practices, which we saw in those
other industries into solar.
This is a pro solar bill, we
certainly want solar to be part
of uh the economy here, but we
just want to stop these
pro these practices that we're
seeing out there, um.
Some, you know, the the there's
a a trade organization REIA in
New Mexico and unfortunately,
some of the members of that
trade organization or some of
these out of state companies
like we had seen vivid solar,
some, some of you may remember
that was in the news several
years ago with the New Mexico
Attorney general doing an
enforcement action. They now go
by a new name, Sunrun, but they
are a member, uh, of that.
Trade organization.
So what it does is very simple.
It's
Uh, starting on section 3 on
page 2, it requires folks to be
permitted.
It requires
Um, folks did not say they're
part of a government program or
member or they're from P&M,
which is something we've seen or
that it's a free system.
Um
It, it it it requires uh or
prohibits, I should say, folks
from creating an email account.
What we've seen is these.
These are often done on tablets.
And the way that there's a check
in place to make sure people
know what they're getting into,
and that is the finance
companies will send an email
with the contract, so folks can
see it and see what they're
agreeing to and salespeople from
um unscrupulous companies will
make up an email.
So that
Email goes to them rather than
the consumer, especially with
elderly folks, and so we wanna
make sure that they're not
creating emails to evade those
protections that the industry
already has in place. Um, also.
And this is important. The, the,
what we've seen is oftentimes.
Companies are representing that
your guaranteed a tax credit.
Not that you might get it, but
that you're guaranteed it and
the reason that's a problem is
because it's often not true,
especially with like the elderly
population, the um
The, the, you have to have a tax
liability to have a tax credit
benefit you if you're on a fixed
income, you don't have that
liability, but when it's
presented as.
Here's the purchase price of
this system. It's $12,000 it's
only $12,000 because you're
getting a $9000 tax credit.
That's the where it's crossing
the line.
We certainly don't think that
Uh, folks should not be
promoting the the tax credits,
it's a good thing, but when they
cross the line and say it's
guaranteed, that's where the,
it, it moves from a good policy
into fraud.
Um, also,
We, we ask that uh uh and and
let me be clear on one other
thing with that provision.
Certainly you can say it's
guaranteed if that's true.
There's no prohibition on that,
but it just says, but to make
sure that is what happens, we
asked that the first person be
qualified, that they've done the
math, and they tell them in
writing that this is what we,
this is our calculations, this
is how we know you're getting
it.
Um
Other things sort of related to
the, the fact of the tablets and
the emails is that if a consumer
requests it, they can get a
paper copy of any contract.
Um, no power of attorneys are
used, that that was, that's just
another way to evade people
knowing what they're getting
into, and then, uh, another
problem that has been seen
repeatedly in New Mexico is the
system sold.
Some of the um.
One of the sayings in the
industry is set it and forget
it, and it's never turned on.
It's never actually made
operational, but the finance
company will not recognize that
fact and continue to build the
person reported on the credit,
ruined their credit, so they can
get paid for a system that
doesn't work.
We've worked with the industry
on this provision. Um, it, it
was the bill originally had the,
the prohibition be at that 90
days.
After install.
If the system isn't operational.
That then you can't request
payments, you can't report it to
a consumer reporting agency, and
you've got to give payments that
have been made back while it's
unoperational.
Now we've we've we've heard some
from the industry that that was
unrealistic sometimes it's
outside of their control. So we
agreed to move that to 180 days.
Um, and then it, it, it, it, uh,
this bill also provides for a
private right of action.
Um, that is because.
We've seen and there has been uh
a bills in the past, or at least
one bill, there was a disclosure
bill.
Concerning some of these solar
issues and it just has not
proven to be effective, the the
the disclosure stuff could be
complementary, but it doesn't
seem to address the problems
that this bill addresses.
And with that I would turn it
back over. Thank you. That's
all, uh, Mr. Chair, would you
like me to move the amendment
that explain the amendment now.
And actually this is a verbal
amendment. This is not.
If
That is not mine.
Yeah.
Uh
No, no, I'm gonna make an
amendment on page 30, I'm sorry.
Go ahead. So that because there
was that there was a lot of
confusion about how, about how
you weather and how you can talk
about these tax credits. So
right now, on page 3, started at
line 12, it says represent to
the consumer that the system
entitles the consumer to federal
or state tax credits.
What I'd like to propose is that
online 12 strike the system.
On line 13.
Strike and titles.
And then, after consumer insert
is guaranteed?
And then strike that 2 before
federal. So how it would read is
represent to the consumer that
the consumer is guaranteed
federal tax, federal or state
tax credit. So page 3, line 12,
strike the system.
Line 13, strike titles.
And after the word consumer,
insert is guaranteed.
And then strike 2 before
federal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
De, I thank you for that. I'm,
I'm just trying to go over my
concern is.
Um
I want the consumer to be
educated with regards to the
credit.
Um, and that's the pitch, right,
that's the pitch is that, hey,
you got $5000 back or whatever.
So that's kind of the
The crux of the transaction.
Um
But even if the tax credit is in
law, it still has to be funded.
I granted the tax credit is
fully funded now.
Um
But
My question is, since in in my
mind because the funding could
theoretically run out, it's not
guaranteed.
Would that simply prohibit any
conversation with regards to any
tax credit.
Mr. Chair, Senator, no, so you
could still talk about it, you
just can't tell someone, it is
guaranteed.
If you don't know that to be
true.
What
Yeah.
Yeah.
Can was turned.
And it's adopted without
objection, back to the bill as
amended, committee members with
questions.
Yeah.
Yes, Thorn.
So,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
So it sounds like this probably
wouldn't be brought forward if
there wasn't some issues going
on and I guess my question is
what, what percentage of
installers.
Are guilty of this sort of
unfair practices. Do you have a
feel for that.
It's, it, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, it's hard to give you
an exact percentage, but what I,
what I can say is that it's
common.
And what I mean by that is it
happens over and over, um,
there's been a lot of lawsuits,
there's been an attorney general
action in the state about some
of these practices and uh.
But uh and it tends to be the
out of state companies that are
doing it, frankly, some of the
bigger national companies that
are doing it, that our new man.
Thank you for that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
You mentioned earlier that the
system, if it's not operational,
I guess you went from 90 to 180
days.
After install, and if it's still
not operational, and the, if the
installer cannot make claims for
payment or or report to the
consumer.
Um
Why would the the system isn't
working.
I, I, I don't understand that.
Well, um, Mr. Chair, Senator,
because that's what's happening.
I don't, I also don't understand
how you can with a straight
face, say you've got to pay for
something that doesn't work and
that in fact hasn't worked 180
days from the point of install,
but it's happening all the time.
The finance companies have taken
the position that they need to
get paid, and they have a loan
and if there's a problem with
the system, the consumer has to
take that up with the installer.
That's not the law, that's not
how it should work.
And so this is, this bill
addresses that.
So
So, thank you, thank you for
that. So, Mr. Chair, I think, so
what I'm hearing then as uh a
person will pay for the
installation by a credit card or
by a check or whatever. But so
they've actually paid for the
system already.
And so now there's no claims for
them to be able to.
Um
All that money back.
The
I mean, the installer so I
installer has already been paid.
Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, if, if
it's a finance situation, it, it
then the installer is paid at
the time of installation.
And so that's why one of the
sayings that you hear in the
industry from the bad guys is
set it and forget it.
Because at that point they don't
care.
Um, so they're paid at
installation, there's still
could be issues that make it
hard to get uh operational and
so that's why we have such a
long period of 180 days.
I I think I answered your
question, but please let me know
if I did not.
You know, I understand. I, I,
I'm just.
I, I'm just wondering why, why
the installers would have a
problem with this if, if, if
it's not functional.
Uh, then
The, uh
Individuals who bought the thing
shouldn't have to pay.
And now the question is, how can
they recoup their funds or
Uh, so what is the installer,
uh, uh, since they've already
been paid, they can just simply
walk away.
That that is what happens
oftentimes Mr. Chair, Senator,
there is a, there is a process
that the finance companies use,
and that's why we started with
90 days. So the finance
companies will make the
installer give the money back to
the finance company that they
were paid on install if the
system is not operational under
in 90 days. But what we've seen
even
even after that happens, the
finance companies are
demanding the consumer keeps
paying.
Even though they've considered
it too long and gotten their
money back.
Understood. Thank you for that.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I
share a grownor with P&M.
PNM supports SB 65, and we think
the sponsor for introducing this
as it would strengthen consumer
protections for residential
customers who choose to
interconnect solar facilities to
a utility, such as PNM.
This bill is essential in
ensuring that
Solar sales representatives
accurately represent their
products and services when
selling or entering into
agreements with homeowners.
It also enhances enforcement
measures against bad actors who
mislead customers, such as
falsely claiming to be working
with PNM.
In recent years, some solar
companies have gone as far as
using power of attorney on
behalf of customers when
submitting solar applications.
While this practice has
decreased a significant issue
remains. Homeowners often left
out of key steps and decisions
in the process. Many, many do
not see their agreements unless
the contractor chooses chooses
to share them.
SB 65 builds upon the
distributed distributed
generation disclosure Act
enacted in 2017, which PNM and
other energy partners helped
develop. Our support for this
bill is not intended to slow the
adoption of private rooftop
solar, but rather to protect
customers. We have received
numerous complaints about
misleading and unfair practices
in this legislation helps ensure
transparency and accountability
in the industry.
Good evening, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Desjardin, and I'm
the executive director of the
renewable energy industry
Industries Association of New
Mexico. We've been around since
2004, consisting mainly of local
companies. We were founded to
bring professionalism and
integrity to our industry. We've
worked with many people in this
building on legislation,
including the Energy Transition
Act. The 10% state tax credit
for solar, which by the way,
provides a um payment whether
you have a tax.
liability or not.
In 2017, we worked with PNM and
the Attorney General's office on
passing the distributed
generation Disclosure Act to
address deceptive marketing
practices in our solar industry.
In this session, we support
Senate Bill 188, rooftop solar
complaints and Senate bill to
33, which takes a distributed
generation, distributed
generation disclosure Act, and
points it to unfair Practices
Act if it's not used.
This bill, however, has many
flaws.
They have addressed one of them
with the amendment on the
discussion of the tax credit,
but it still has other flaws.
Section 4.B.1 pulls in, innocent
third party lenders like Visa,
Mastercard and local credit
unions.
Section 4.B.2 states a customer
can request all monies paid
upfront, be returned even if the
system is fully installed, but
not operational due to no fault
of the contractor.
In Section 5, the private right
of action. Why do we have this
instead of the unfair Practices
Act. Please support Senate Bill
188 and Senate Bill 233, please
Mr. Chair, can you hear me?
Can you hear me, Mr. Chair?
Uh, we had, uh, Randy Sedwick,
uh, registered to speak.
In opposition, he's not here, so
Rocky, I, I don't have you
registered to speak in
opposition, but I'll recognize
you for up to a minute, um,
yeah, I'll make some exceptions
to the rule when there's time
that allows it, but realize if
you don't register in timely do
so by our rules you're subject
to not getting recognized. So
Rocky I recognize you for a
minute.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
despite the good intentions of
this bill, what it does not do,
it does not recover funds from
bad companies that go out of
business, disappear or file
bankruptcy. It does not train
salespeople to tell the truth or
keep bad actors from lying. It
does not provide better
protection for consumers than
the current anti-fraud and
pro-consumer protection laws.
Therefore, this bill will not
help people who are hurt by bad
solar companies. But this bill
does is to hurt consumers by
potentially killing good solar
companies. Section 3B2 prohibits
true statements that state and
federal incentives are part of
government programs, or that
there are a utility program when
there is. This bill makes
companies liable for truthfully
telling consumers about tax
incentives.
Section 3B3, the bill creates a
liability for who is qualified
to to give tax advice regarding
solar program. Must the person
be a CPA or enrolled with the
IRS as a solar tax advisor. This
bill does not clearly define who
can give solar advice or or tax
advice and therefore creates an
unfair liability. In short, the
bill creates an unfair liability
for good solar companies acting
in good faith. This bill creates
a
simplified path for unjust
unjustified class actions that
provide treble damages and
attorneys' fees. This bill is
primarily a money path for
unscrupulous lawyers. In some,
in summary, good story companies
oppose this bill because it will
hurt consumers by killing good
solar companies with unfair
lawsuits, thereby reducing
consumer options. Please table
this bill. Thank you. Thank you.
All right, that's everyone we
have.
Who timely registered on the
bill will go to members of the
committee now with questions
committee members, questions.
are worth and then Senator
Brantley. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
I did hear this in tax
committee, so I, I want to focus
a little more on the private
right of action, just walk us
through.
Again, the argument was made, we
already have unfair trade
practices.
Uh, so just walk us through
that, and I'm curious also and
you, you have this being a
one-sided attorney's fee
provision, not to the prevailing
party, but just the consumer,
uh, so just walk us through the
thoughts and why this is needed.
Mr. Chair I'll start and then
probably kick it to Mr.
Training, um.
So
I know that often uh our chair
likes to, if you're gonna do
something that is unfair trade
practices, he likes having it
all in 11 statue, all in that
statue. It didn't make sense to
us to put this in the unfair
Trade Practices Act because it's
very specific behavior that
while it is, it is predatory in
this context, it might not be in
others. Stuff like creating the,
the email address. Uh, we didn't
want that to be an unfair trade
practice overall. So we are
essentially
mirroring, uh,
Those remedies somewhat here.
Um, it is, uh, it is, it is only
attorney fees for the consumers
because I believe in all of our
consumer protection legislation,
we always have it be consumer or
attorney fees for the consumers,
because we want to encourage
attorneys to take these cases.
But Mr. Trian will say anything
I missed.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, so, so
the, the, the provisions are,
are mimic what's in most
consumer protection statutes,
some consumer protection
statutes do have a, what would
be called an anti reverse fee
shifting thing that if the
consumer brings a case that's
groundless.
Then the, the, the consumer can
be taxed for fees and that would
have to be paid for the
defendant. The reason that's not
in here primarily is because it
just mimics Rule 11.
It's essentially that's already
in the law and the courts
haven't really determined that
provision to mean anything
different than Rule 11, so it's
just seems unnecessary.
So, Mr. Chair and Senator, but I
think in the unfair trade
practices I'm remembering now,
there is that provision.
Cause I know I think at one
point a very early in my legal
career, I got myself diverted
down something and immediately
had that thrown at me. Uh, so
again, you're, and I, and I do,
I guess I do see it a little
different than Rule 11.
Rule 11
again it's kind of its own lane.
So I just flagged that issue.
Second thing, I just, and we
talked a little bit about this,
but I think it's important just
to stay.
Uh, Senator Doig and to your
expert, are you aware of any New
Mexico-based companies that are
engaged in these practices.
Not really, your, uh, Mr. Chair
apologize, I used to be in
court, um, not really. Um, what,
what we're, uh, you know, I've
handled, um,
30 or 40 of these cases easily.
I have not not seen any New
Mexico companies get in trouble
with the exception of New Mexico
solar, and it was really a
different thing. It was just
that they ran out of money and
we're going bankrupt and so they
weren't able to fulfill their
promises for that reason.
So I, I would love to have some
kind of a
Exception here that could exempt
out all the basically make this
apply to out of state companies
and not to New Mexico based
companies. I do.
Positive energy.
Is a company here in Santa Fe
that does great work, they've
got some concerns about this,
and I don't think you're
intending at all.
To get to them or the other kind
of good actors, but they're
worried about getting pulled
into this. So when I realized
probably for
Interstate commerce reasons we
can't do that. Uh, but again,
that's answers my questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you guys for this presentation.
Today we've had several
conversations about bad apples.
And, and, and I think that when
we talk about bills that have
unintended consequences because
they're overreaching and then
those that actually target
those, that's a, this is a good
bill because targeting the bad
apples and this, this is
absolutely a predatory practice.
Thank you for visiting with me
before to explain the details of
this, and I will, I will
certainly be supporting.
Chairman, thank you, thank you,
Senator Do. Thank you,
gentlemen, for, for educating me
on the bill. What is the forgive
me, Mr. Expert. What is your
Involvement in the industry or
the bill.
Itself
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, I've
been a consumer protection
attorney for 25 years. I started
right after law school in Gallup
and legal aid.
And what I've seen is.
In the past, maybe 5 or so
years, it's just the complaints
have grown and grown and grown
about these particular
practices.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
gentlemen, the um.
On page 3.
I think this fixes my main
concern, you know, lines 12
through 14 shall not represent
to the consumer.
But the consumer is guaranteed
federal or state tax credits.
Because that provision is in
there.
Uh
Do we need lines 15 through 20.
Um, I think.
I think line 16 through 20 are
probably good to keep in there.
But I think
Uh
I don't know what are your
thoughts, Senator, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think we
do need to keep that in there
because if they, they are
qualified to say that, and they
do know that it's true, then
they should be able to.
It's just that they shouldn't be
able to say that if they're not
qualified to do so and don't
know that it's true.
Thank you, and I agree, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I agree with
16 to 20, we want, but how are
they able to say if it's true.
If they're not qualified to give
tax advice.
So Mr. Chair center, so yes,
they would have to be qualified
to give tax advice. They would
have to have evaluated the
eligibility of the consumer to
whom the representation is being
made, and they would have to
provide written documentation of
the evaluation and
representation at the same time.
So, so they have to not only
know it was true. They have to
be someone who has a background
to qualified to give tax advice
to
To know what they're talking. If
I am a, a 19 year old, uh, door
to door salesman, and I have no
idea and I, I have no
background, no basis upon which
to give this this opinion that
they are guaranteed these tax
credits. I shouldn't be able to
say it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator.
No, I, I, I generally agree with
what you're saying. I'm just
asking myself who is qualified
and who is not, I think, um.
I think these door to door
salesmen should be educated on,
on the statute their company
should actually contact.
Texan rabbits say hey, how much
money is left in the fund as of
this month or whatnot, but um.
But I appreciate the answers.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator, I had some
concerns. I've discussed them
with you, I think, and I, I
wanted to see the hearing
because I hadn't committed
myself one way or the other,
Bill. I don't think this is
good, um, lawmaking to be
counted with you only because
again, I, I think I've talked to
you about this before, I do
think this belongs to the unfair
Trade Practices Act, um, the,
the reason I think that way is
that uh this, this is an
industry that has some problems,
there's no doubt about it, and
you've identified those, and I
think you're doing a good job of
trying to flag those address
those, but we could say the same
thing about.
Used auto dealers, right? And we
don't have a separate unfair
trade Practices Act for auto um
used auto dealers. We don't,
there's a lot of industries that
kind of have a history or have
some notoriety for, for engaging
in somewhat unscrupulous
practices. We try and capture
all those within the unfair
trade practices Act for a number
of reasons. One is that the
remedies that are kind of
consistent instead of word is
right, we've got um even the
issue of the attorney's fee
shifting is in there, uh, and
we, uh, allow attorneys' fees to
to a prevailing party under that
act, but we also
allow for a reverse shifting and
that act when the claim is
groundless and determined to be
groundless has to even be from
the inception of the claim,
right, so you can't even
determine that it's groundless
as you go along, it has to be
groundless when when brought. So
we develop a body of law, case
law, under that act to interpret
the act and guide courts and
what means a groundless claim
and so forth, and I think if we
start.
Unfair Trade Practices Act on an
industry by industry basis, our
heads gonna explode, right? Uh,
we're gonna find all kinds of
different industries and we'll,
we'll end up with a bill each
session to go attack some other
particular industry or business
practice that's unscrupulous,
and I, I really do like the idea
of putting it all together and
the unfair acts, so that, that's
one concern I've got. I also
have um some concern too that I,
I don't know that it's a bad
thing to set up an email account
for a consumer, uh, we have
people who need to be able.
a lot, a lot of things I buy
these days have, you have to
have an email account right to
even buy it, um, and or even
transact with certain
transaction and some folks may
not be able to do that easily
and so setting up an email
account for somebody if they
request it. That doesn't trouble
me, but this would prohibit
that.
Uh, this would, uh, prohibit
somebody.
Representing or applying that a
system they install is part of a
government program.
Or that it's offered as part of
a program from an applicable
utility company. Help me to
understand, isn't there a
possibility that some point in
time we could have a government
program, um, that would give
consumers certain tax benefits,
uh, or in industry, PNM might
utility company might say, hey,
we're gonna come up with a
program that's going to provide
some benefit to consumers and,
and this would say uh that
somebody selling the system
could never make those
representations, and to me
that's, that's forever. It's in
statute, right? So, couldn't you
see a
where the utility might come up
with something to incentivize or
uh or a government because it
just is a government program,
government might incentivize
something like this. Why would
we prohibit that perpetually?
And Mr. Chair, I think it is
possible that could happen. What
we're seeing right now is that
people are saying this and it's
untrue.
Um, so I think, but I think we
could easily put in language in
there that says if it's untrue.
Yeah, but then that gets me back
to the whole unfair trade
practices Act, which is, again,
makes it unlawful to do anything
that's misleading and deceptive,
um, or advertising things that
are unfair or deceptive, and so
forth, but, but I appreciate
your acknowledgement that right
now, when people make these
representations, it's untrue and
it's deceptive and unfair and
should be unlawful because we
don't have any government
programs to do this, or the
utilities don't, but if they
did.
Uh, they wouldn't be able to
make these representations if we
enacted this the way it's
written, and so you're right, it
could take some modifications.
I, I'm uh as I as I'm here
longer and longer, Senator, and
as we mentioned Senator Ivy Soto
earlier today. Without Senator I
Soto, I'm less inclined to feel
like we have to fix everybody's
bill, uh, and, and spend the
time with the committee
rewriting and re-crafting bills,
so I'm kind of taking them
mostly as they, as they are. But
I appreciate the fact you may
work on this between now and the
end.
Um, I, I have, uh, uh, concerns,
some of the same concerns that
were expressed about
representing uh representing
federal or state tax credits. It
says you can't do that unless
the seller is qualified to give
tax advice, I don't know what
that would be. Um, I kinda give
people tax advice. I think I did
so even earlier today. Senator
Wirth was the one actually
suggesting I take a tax
deduction for my spaceport
bosses,
so, yeah, yeah. I don't know
that that makes you qualified, I
don't, I don't, I don't know if
he's qualified either, but I,
you know, we
all exchange tax advice all the
time. I don't know what it means
to say you can't give uh any of
these representations of of
federal or state tax credits
unless they're qualified to give
tax advice and what that means
we've got, I, I don't know, some
pre you presume a CPA is
qualified to give tax advice,
but I've got a CPA and sometimes
I'm not sure about his tax
advice, um, and, um, and then,
frankly, you can go to H&R Block
or whatever and probably get
people there that are doing your
taxes that are probably not CPAs
would be my guess, or maybe not
even the count.
majors. Um, so, I think you
probably go online and get tax
advice would be my guess. So I
don't, I don't know what it
means to give qualified tax
advice. Um,
And then, and then you, you
couldn't do this unless you
evaluated the eligibility,
that's the words that use your
evaluated the eligibility.
Again, I don't know how you do
that, um, I, I litigate against
Mexico taxation revenue
department on my own behalf, uh,
because we have arguments about
eligibility for tax treatment at
times too, so that, that would
be difficult for me.
Um, on page 4, you, you would
prohibit somebody selling or
installing a residential system
by accepting a power of
attorney. I don't know you can
do that legally, I think if
somebody gives you a power of
attorney, we look at whether the
power of attorney is lawful and
power of attorney can define
what the scope is within the
power of attorney. This bill
would say that no power of
attorney could ever be accepted
in connection with this
particular industry or sales and
that any power of attorney would
be would be void, uh, that would
do so, and I think that would be
turning the
on its head too, cause again, I
think we have a pretty good body
of law, what you can do with the
power of attorney.
Um, and, uh.
And then like, we've already
kind of talked a little bit
about the the remedies, private
right of action, but, but again,
I think that this is probably
covered well in the unfair trade
Practices Act and
Here you're putting a, a, a
damage award or whatever is the
greater of either the actual
damages or a statutory damage. I
don't know how that compares to
the unfair trade practices act,
but I'm hoping, bless you, that
we're gonna be looking at the,
the statutory penalties under
the unfair Trade Practices Act,
I think a little later in this
session too, so, again, um,
those I just wanted to give you
my reasons with the open
expectation that if you have the
votes here to move on that maybe
you'll address some of these uh
in the next committee or on the
floor, so.
Those are my comments.
Committee members with emotion,
pleasure.
Moving your pass
has a due pass.
Uh, let's do a roll call,
please, Emily.
Senator Rampy.
Sen too.
General O'Malley.
Yeah.
Senator Thornton
No.
Play my boat.
There were
Jeremiah no move to explain.
Cervantes? No.
Tao, we'll call it a tie here
for a little while and we'll see
what happens when we get maybe 1
or 2 more members back in your
center, OK? And in the meantime,
it might be a good idea for you
to get a chance to look at some
of the comments here and maybe
come back to us with the
committee sub a new new meeting,
right? Keep working with some of
the opponents.
So, so you had to explain your
rule, right? just based on
the conversation and the
feedback that you were
providing um
I agree we need to go after the.
We used to go out the bad
actors, uh, but based on the
conversations and the sort of
the ambiguity in some of the
comments here, I think.
I would prefer you come back
with a mini substitute and
See if we can get it passed.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator for a good presentation.
I hope what's interesting to the
committee and to those that are
watching is once again a
bipartisan vote on some of these
bills, kind of interesting how
the alignment's happening, uh,
here and in your committee,
Senator, doing your rules too,
so you wanted to explain as well
thank you, Chairman Senator, I
appreciate the the lawyer for
bringing this forward. If every
lawyer came to the legislature
with fixes, it'd be awesome.
Statutory construction is a very
unique area of law. So this is
written a little different, um,
but also the advocacy groups and
the
good actors are saying.
They don't like the bill, so
that kind of tipped the scales
for me. Thank you.
Let's see, we have the rural
Electric Wildfire liability 281,
but that's Center Woods. I don't
see him here or centered
compost. So we'll go to you set
the results, set at 381.
Thank you for your patience.
And more.
Thenurel, welcome.
up, you have.
One minute. No, please, take
your time. This is a Senate Bill
381. Welcome.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
The reason I'm bringing Senate
Bill 381 to you today is because
in the past we've had lots of
concerns from the judicial
branch asking for a
clarification on the livestock
larceny. In 2023, I worked with
the Attorney General's office,
prior administration, I worked
in particular.
With Taylor Bowie in the in the
um
Attorney General's office.
And this is what we came up with
and unfortunately, my
Expert witness is not here right
now. He is.
Here in Santa Fe, though, I, I
will tell you that, so he's the
town for missing, not missing
totally our anniversary.
But Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
This is what we came up with
and.
I need to point out that in the
past.
Livestock thefts have hit.
Farmers and ranchers pretty
hard.
And y'all are gonna laugh when I
I tell you this, I went online
to find out the cost of chickens
because whenever I presented
this bill before in the House,
um,
Ag Committee, one of the members
there was concerned about the
price of chickens. How can you
compare a chicken to a cow.
How can you compare a chicken to
a horse.
Whenever I went online because I
guess most of you all know what
the price of eggs are right now,
$8 a dozen.
I was surprised to learn that
right now a single chicken, I
pull it, which is not one that's
quite ready to lay eggs yet.
is worth over $40.
So that can make a big, big
difference in where, where we're
going with this bill.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. This is defining
livestock in the criminal code,
it's amending the crime for
larceny of livestock and
firearms to permit multiple
offenses.
The changes that we have made to
this and.
A lot of it just does stay the
same, especially whenever we
are.
Talking about the livestock part
of it on page 2.
Clean up language on line 15
instead of New Mexico, we have
stricken that and put in the
state.
Or any subdivision of the state.
Again, on that same page, line
19, the state, or any
subdivision of the state. We've
added that language just to
clean up language.
The brunt of the bill.
Starts on page 3, and that is
the.
Definitional livestock we've
expanded it to read livestock
may be singular or plural.
And head of livestock means a
single animal.
That's very important.
The last part of the bill we do
go in increments of what is
stolen.
And
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee.
Livestock right now, a bread cow
is worth about $2800 per head.
$2800 per head of bread cow.
That calf that might be by her
side is worth about $700.
So we're talking big money there
whenever we're talking about
horses.
A good ranch horse is
irreplaceable.
I know because.
4 months ago, I had a mare stole
it off the ranch.
With no
Nobody, uh,
has been found at this mare. It
makes me sick.
Whenever we're talking about.
Multiple hits of livestock that
can make the difference between
a farmer or a rancher being able
to go on to the next year.
And I think that we need to
address this problem because
like I said.
The judicial system has asked
for clarification from the
legislative body over what we're
going to do with multiple items
being stolen.
So Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee,
I will stand for any questions
that you may have.
Thank you so much, Senator Zel.
I don't believe we have anyone
speaking in favor or in
opposition, nor registered on
Zoom, so we'll go to the
committee for questions. Senator
Devi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Um, so,
Looking at page 5.
Uh, lines 6 to 10.
I am confused because.
It has two different situations.
But they're both 2nd degree
felonies.
Um, so it's
Number 2 says greater than, and
this is when the value of the
stolen livestock is greater than
$2500 is guilty of a second
degree felony.
Or
3 greater than $20,000 in
multiple livestock are stolen.
is guilty of a second degree
felony.
Why
Why are those different
situations.
Why do those have the the same
felony? I'm, I'm confused, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Doohe, the
first one, this is the way I'm
interpreting this, I could be
wrong here.
As my expert witness is not
here, but anyway, the first one,
number 2, that is for one.
had a livestock, if you wanna
call it that. The other one is
for multiple, and I think that
is the difference there.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, why would
we have, I would think that.
The theft of one should be a
lower penalty than the theft of
multiple, but here we have it
the same, madam, um.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Doig,
this allows the prosecutor on
separate on separate offenses,
but it does not require that
they do so, they still have some
discretion based on the nature
of the crime.
I hope that explains it.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I
I remain confused, um.
I
I understand discretion, but I.
To me there's, there is a
significant difference between
if I stole $2500 from Senator
Maestas versus stealing $20,000
from him.
I would think that those would
be the penalty for that would
be, would be different. And so
I'm confused about why it isn't
here.
And I think Senator Massas might
might have
is out, with your permission, uh
Senator Do, so,
I think there's a
We have the best drafters in
town, no question about it, but
there may be a drafting error,
so tell me if this was your
intent.
On page 5, I think you're trying
to trying to create a tier of a
4th, 1/3, a second.
But what this did is it created
a 3, a second, and a second.
Um
So what I would suggest is on,
on page 5 line 5, I believe
instead of saying 3rd, it should
have said 4th.
And then on page 5 line 7, it
should have said 3rd.
And then, of course, on page 5
line 10, it should have said 2,
so it's a 4th, a 3rd, a 2nd. Now
granted for 2500 or less.
It lowers the penalty, but
That's probably appropriate
cause I think about 9 out of 10
is gonna be $2500 or more.
But it creates that second
degree tier which
Which, uh, which we currently
don't have in statute, so.
I think that's what happened.
Mr. Chairman, I think you might
be right because I just checked
down here below and it did,
For the firearm, it is.
So yes, that is a.
So that is a mistake. Thank you
very much for pointing this out.
That, that definitely makes more
sense to me. Um.
Overall, I think we.
I, I
I, the, the heartburn that I, I
have with this bill.
It's the same that others we've
seen where it allows for
stacking.
Uh, essentially of.
Of these charges and of these
penalties, um,
And I had never, I had never
heard that. I was looking at
our, our analysis. I had never
heard of the single larceny
doctrine.
But it's really what we've been
talking about on these girls or
session.
Uh, which is that.
When you are have the capability
to to charge separately for
every head, uh, of livestock or
every uh firearm.
That you can very quickly get up
to um.
Disproportionately high
sentences for things that great,
I think a constitutional
proportionality problem. Uh, but
the, the example we had in our
Our analysis.
Was that under the, the, under
this approach, livestock, uh,
larceny for the penalties for
larceny of livestock would
vastly exceed the punishment or
even the most serious
non-livestock thefts, though a
person who stole $10 million of
general property or cash would
be guilty of a secondary felony
facing 9 years in prison, as
someone who stole 25 cows or
firearms would be guilty of
potentially of 25 felonies with
a potential sentence of 220
5 years.
And so every time we take one of
these stacking approaches, it
creates, I think, a
constitutional proportionality
problem.
Um, and it gets out of whack
with our approach.
Two penalties otherwise. So this
would, this would essentially
elevate theft of livestock and
firearms far beyond.
How we treat theft of, of
anything else.
And so it, it would be out of
whack with
With our overall penalty scheme.
Um
I don't know if there's
necessarily a question there,
but I don't know if you want to
respond.
Madam, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Doig.
If you will read the analysis
that I was just given just a few
minutes ago whenever on page two
of the analysis from the uh
judiciary Committee.
Under single larceny doctrine we
have the first one talks about
uh single larceny doctrine to
the defendant's 5 convictions
for stealing 5 firearms, then
you go on down, you go to state
the tourists and State v.
Chadwick, and those are two
separate things, and that's what
the judicial system is wanting
us to.
Iron out for them.
Again, I think it goes back to
it's up to the discretion of the
prosecution, how severe these
penalties can be. This is a
guideline in my opinion on what.
Does need to happen. Well then,
let's share something with
stacking,
but whenever we're asked to
clarify what we mean in statute
for them.
That's what I'm trying to do
here.
And center and uh Mr. Chair,
Senator, I, I certainly have no
objection to us responding to
judicial opinions that we get,
um, and if we get really bad
judicial opinions to making law
that that addressed them. Um,
But I don't
I don't read. I don't read this
as
As overturning the single
larceny doctrine.
Um, or calling for legislation
that would do so.
Um, and I
And I think it it still doesn't
change the proportionality
problem or the being out of
whack with the rest of our
sentencing, um, skin problem.
So I, I unfortunately can't
support this bill.
Um, but I appreciate you. I
understand the problem that
you're, you're describing, uh,
And appreciate your
You coming before us.
Senator Thornton.
Mr. Chair,
Not being a lawyer.
Uh, if, if I may,
and Senator Dohe I'm, I'm
curious what how would we change
this law.
So that we would not have the uh
single larceny model.
How would we change it so that
this would fall under a single
larceny model per episode. I
mean, what would need to be
changed?
make this law acceptable.
Is that a question to me, OK,
um, this is more of a learning
process for me.
So I think it would have to be
taking out the, the stacking
language, which I am.
I am looking at page 5. I think
they're worth.
Awesome.
So, Mr. Chair, yeah, it's page
5, line 25, section I and then
page 6 lines 1 and 2, you just,
if you delete it.
That would, that would solve
that issue.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair and Senator,
it's page 5 that final
paragraph, I.
Delete that paragraph at the
bottom on line 25.
In the top line 1 and 2. That's
the stacking provision.
Uh
And also, uh
Senator Senator doing Senator,
it also erase some on page 4.
Paragraph L because there would
be no need for the definition of
head of livestock.
I'm gonna
Except that as a proposed
amendment.
Would that be friendly amendment
to you, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
I'm kind of confused. Why would
you take that off?
Thank you. So Senator, also the
policy is we.
Even with regards to child porn,
larceny, possession of stolen
property, ah, the current
statute with regards to law, uh,
we just did an embezzlement bill
a couple weeks ago.
What we got to think about is
how easy it is, how easy is it
to prosecute a case.
And it's easier to prosecute in
the aggregate.
So if someone steals 10 cows,
the prosecutor would have to
would have to prove 10 different
crimes.
As opposed to
Proving one crime and then you
just add up the value of the
cows.
So it does two things. One, it
makes it simpler to prosecute.
And easier to prove, but it also
uh avoids this notion of
stacking.
Where someone would be uh.
You were a prosecutor and a
judge could run things
consecutive.
And someone's penalty would be
disproportionate to the crime
they committed in relation to
other crimes in the criminal
code.
So this committee
And it has a
History of, of, frankly, I don't
think there's a
I'm trying to think of a crime
on the books that that
specifically
Uh, allows stacking. Now
granted,
Courts and prosecutors are
allowed to do it, and then the
courts would determine if that's
allowed or not, but.
But I don't believe there's any.
Now granted a a particular crime
is if you commit the same crime
each day for 10 days, that's 10
crimes.
But as it relates to theft,
embezzlement.
Things of that nature, it's um.
We, we prosecute, we want to
prosecute in the aggregate and
not stack is kind of the.
The way the
Crime laws are written in New
Mexico, basically.
Is that about in the ball park.
Go ahead and withdraw the the
proposed motion, uh, Senator
Thorn, you have the floor.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So what
I'm hearing is that if we, if we
were to propose an amendment to
eliminate the last.
Line and page page 5 line 25,
and, and strike the rest of it.
And this proposal might be uh
sufficient to allow, uh,
Crimes in the aggregate, if you
will, without the stacking
issue, if I'm understanding this
correctly.
So
So would, uh,
Mr. Chair.
And Senator, would you accept
this as a friendly proposal?
To eliminate the very last.
Line of page 5.
Strike that and uh
Last two lines on page 6.
Mr. Chairman Senator Thornton.
If that's where the problem is
with the committee as far as the
stacking aspect of a ghost, I
wouldn't be objecting to that at
all. The problem I have with uh
Senator Maestus is part of Head
of Livestock.
Sometimes people say, well, how
many head of livestock do you
have?
Well, it can be 500. I've got
this one, this one, this one,
this one, this one. So head of
livestock can be either singular
or plural, but this just
States that the head of
livestock means a single animal.
Even though it can be singular
or plural.
It just reads funny because it
is on the next page of my
opinion. Thank you if I may,
Senator Thornton, Senator Zel,
forgive me, I don't mean to be
argumentative, but if we remove
I.
If we remove I that removes.
Um, the word head of livestock
and the word head of livestock
will not be contained in any
other part of this, the bill or
the statute. And so there would
be no need to define something
that's not.
In the bill or the statute is
my, is my point.
Thorton, you have the floor.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
So what I'm hearing then is I,
I, I would like to try to
propose an amendment so that we
could get this through, um, if
we can leave it with livestock,
maybe singular or plural.
And eliminate
Page 4, strike L.
Head of I thought means a single
animal, just to eliminate that
completely.
Because we've already said lives
start maybe signal referral
and then remove section I on the
last line 25.
Of, um,
Page 5 and
Strike everything on page 6.
Lines 1 and 2.
And I think that would
meet the requirements of not
stacking.
And
Still, uh penalties.
Or arsenic.
I was, would that be considered
unacceptable?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thornton,
yes, I do find that as a
friendly amendment.
So that uh amendment is friendly
to the sponsor uh for
discussion.
Uh, Senator Dewitt. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And so I, I just want
to, because I think Senator
Thornton is
Is, is hoping to, to fix the
bill to get through. I just want
to make clear.
I would still have problems with
the bill because of the, the
other language on.
Page 5.
Talking about firearms, which is
still out of, out of sync with
our other penalties. So if you
look on page 4,
When it's talking about.
Uh, whoever is committing
larceny at various levels.
Of value and, and what the
penalty for that is.
What we see in on the second
half of page 5.
It's still different from that
scheme that we've already
established. And so, for
example,
On page 4, we see that whoever
uh subsection F line 22, whoever
commits larceny, when the value
of the stolen property is over
$20,000 that's the second degree
felony. On page 5 at line 23.
If you have, if you stolen a
firearm, that's worth more than
$15,000. That's a first degree
felony. So it's a lower value,
higher penalty that is, that is
out of sync again with, with our
general sentencing scheme.
And so, so I just wanted to, I
did not want Senator Thornton to
be
Disappointed if when his fix uh
did not fix it for me. Thank you
for that. So yeah, it's not a
bandwagon effect, but there's a
motion on the.
On the table, any further
discussion with regards to the
motion. Oh, thank you. So the
motion for the folks.
Listening at home on, on the
page 5 at the bottom, strike
line 25, strike I in its
entirety and on page 6, strike
lines 1 and 2.
And then since it's no longer
necessary, we go over to the top
of page 4 and strike line one in
its entirety.
Any further discussion on that
motion.
Is there any objection?
Without motion.
Any objection to that motion.
So you have an amended bill.
Jordan, you, you have the floor.
I, I apologize because I know
this is one of the things that
uh chair hates to do is to
the bill as we're reading it.
And, and so it seems like we had
made discussions earlier with
regards to page 5 line.
5 that we changed the 3rd to a
4th. I don't know if we accepted
that or not.
Um
And then we said on line 7 on
page 5, we changed that second
degree felony to a 3rd.
those were, that was to remedy
the issue, so I wanna include
that in this current current
amendment.
OK, thank you, so that was never
formally proposed, but why are
you propose like a?
Second Amendment, that'll
guarantee your caucuses support
and then, but yeah, why don't
you propose a new amendment with
regards to those two words, OK,
uh, Mr. Chair, I'd like to
propose a 2nd amendment to page
5.
And to
cross out on line 5, 3rd,
replace it with 4th degree
felony.
And the 4th.
And, um, line 7 strike 2nd.
And replace it with 3rd. Thank
you, Senator Thornton, is that a
friendly?
Madam sponsor.
We had already determined that
that was a, I'm also reading
here that at the present law
theft of any property valued
between 2500 and $20,000 is the
3rd degree felony in over 20,000
right now
degree felony.
So we might have some.
That was the last one is right,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Thornton on line 8, that one is
correct there.
What we're changing is 1 and 2
in this, but if that's.
I hope that's just a typo.
Oh yes, that would be a friendly
minute.
Thank you. That's, that's a
friendly. Any further
discussion?
Any objection to that amendment
saying no, you have the 2nd
Amendment has been adopted.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I still.
I recognize there's still some
issues that uh some of our
senators have, but those were
the two amendments I, I feel
comfortable with.
Thank you.
Sure. Thank you and just um.
Or I recognize you Senator, just
just to wrap it up, I think, um,
I think this is doable if we
wanted to create.
A 2nd degree felony for a higher
amount, maybe not for the guns,
but for the livestock for sure.
I think um
You could
To delete 4 and 5, you could
change.
3rd back to 2nd, but, but, um,
and then also, I think on
section 8, I think we're, I'm
just, my mind is blown, I think
we're missing something.
Because the, if you read the
current law, it doesn't read.
I think there's a 2nd degree
involved in the firearm if it's
if it's above 20,000, I think
that they're doing showed it to
me. But anyway, that's, it's a,
it's it's a.
It's a good, uh, it's something
that we need to understand with
regards to livestock because it
is, it is, it is very important
that uh that livestock has never
ever stolen into Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Move to
the table.
So there's a motion to table.
It's non debatable. You can call
the role.
No.
Um
No.
They work.
I
Yes.
So you about that motion, uh,
passes the bill has been tabled,
Senator Savantes to explain his
vote.
Luke Gunvis put in the bill for
Larson. We've had a lot of
hearing about that, a lot of
discussion, and it seemed like
that was part of the amendments
that were taken into the case,
but um I also think that anytime
we're doing sentencing
enhancements, again, some of you
that are new to the Senate, I'm
going to always ask you about
where you're at with the
sentencing commission, so the
penalties are kind of consistent
with the bigger overall scheme.
So in this case, I, I can
imagine a gun being worth more
than $15,000 so there are
collectibles and somebody steals
a collectible gun worth more
than $15,000 1st 1st degree
felony, and I don't do criminal.
But that's a long sentence.
What's the fifth, what's a first
degree felony sentence? Um, 18
years mandatory, yeah, yeah,
you're gonna do 18 years if you
still the wrong gun. That's a
bit harsh, so that's my reason.
Thank you.
I may respond to that right now
Holland and Holland Royal Deluxe
double rifle, King Silford,
$228,000 a night.
Yeah
So anyway.
Mr. Chairman, members, thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you, Senator.
All righty, what do we got next?
Um
Do we do 281
don't have we don't have
compost, uh, news, we're gonna
call it a day. Good work.
There's a lot of here.
