Came based on the crime they've
been accused of committing I
don't think it's any surprise
that that I've been somewhat
skeptical of that approach to
proceedings and interestingly
the events of late with the
accusations made against an
individual whose election shut
in the homes of certain elected
officials gave us I think a good
illustration in case study of
how some of those words
particularly because
interestingly this individual in
my opinion rightfully was was
detained and is being detained
for those crimes by the fact
that the so called Arnold.
Recommended that individual be
released and and I'm not
surprised at that pool
recommended that release given
the tool recommending it really
so many other individuals who
were involved in some pretty
high profile crime in New Mexico
so they give us an opportunity
maybe explore a little bit about
how these tools used.
And I think of the appropriately
perhaps how it might be improved
to be used from the onset on a
couple of things one is this is
a tool that's not established in
statute this is not a tool that
we as legislators have adopted
more directed it's a creature of
court procedures and rules and
so they will rightfully be some
discussion and thinking about
what before the legislature has
to dictate what the court does
and does not do but hopefully by
this proceeding and presentation
if nothing else will that have a
better understanding that and
perhaps encourage the court to
re evaluate the need for the the
tool for how the tools being
utilized so that's the purpose
of today's hearing courage all
due to have questions I think
many of you will need to be a
good discussion.
The upper The presentation today
I've asked all the presenters to
keep the remarks to ten no more
than fifty minutes all cut off
the presentation of each person
on the list at fifteen minutes
so that we keep things moving
and we get out here the
reasonable time and most
important the committee has
enough time to discuss things
amongst ourselves as well as ask
questions of the those
presenting so the first
representative we have is Jenna
Boller I haven't met Jenna
before which is agreed to be
present remotely.
Jenna is the president and
executive director of justice
action network I've asked her to
give us just a background in in
hopefully a because then of the
objective perspective on the
pool but it's origins and how to
use it maybe at a national level
and then we have Mister happen
here of from the administrative
office of courts we have a
weapon I think we'll probably be
presenting quite a bit about how
the court sees the pool of how
the court sees its use and the
and that'll be the perspective I
think from the courts.
We have Mister Mendez here of we
have the tree General appreciate
him being here too with perhaps
some suggestions on how the tool
might be better use or or how
it may and may not be well used
the and then we have
Representative is a public
defender and Chris Moore is I'm
looking for to presentation and
a request for more customers
with the Santa Fe institute as
it turns out has done some
research recently and some
studies on on this very topic so
should be mention presentation
an intraday for all of us ms
Butler we have you on the screen
can you hear me.
Miss Butler.
Okay.
Zoom yes good afternoon
committee continuing yes miss
Boller thank you I I personally
cannot hear you.
I was trying to read lips a
little bit more of it and didn't
didn't catch much of it but let
me just say the US Senate thank
you so much for allowing me to
be with you virtually today and
thank you for seeing this
credibly important conversation
at my name is Jon Boller I
servizi executive director of
the justice action network we
are national I would see for
organization that has had the
pleasure of working it in New
Mexico since twenty fifteen and
in the interest of time I was
very of our history in New
Mexico the only to point out
that right around that time is
winding Mexico began its journey
towards effective pretrial
reforms beginning at twenty
sixteen as we all know the
constitutional amendment that
was widely approved by New
Mexico voters that really had to
at the very important tools
number one was to ensure that
individuals that do pose a risk
to public safety are detained
prior to the trial court and
then number two to ensure that
those who do not pose a risk to
public safety are not detained
solely because of an inability
to pay cash bail.
And result the court and the
legislature have worked for the
last seven years now to
implement those changes and to
make sure that system is meeting
at schools but no matter how
laudable the originals are no
policy consenus shop in must be
continually examined and
measured and evaluated to make
sure that it is meeting those
original holes or to see if the
bulls needs change to ensure the
public safety remains paramount
and that's what's brought us
here today.
I want to talk with this
committee at thirty eight point
that sure that New Mexico's.
Miss Butler.
Hang up on you to well as this
action just kind of coordinate
Mr chairman that has to figure
out how.
Let's see it.
Has that can you hear me.
Them as well we're gonna we're
gonna work on the daughter for
just a second please right
now we're having some difficulty
hearing you clearly.
Yes that.
Unfortunately we don't have to.
Connected on the other line is
or one other.
That is not the first time to do
this.
There is a way.
and afterwards.
How about.
Would you would you just.
Yes so.
The problem is that we can't
hear her very well it's not fair
This presentation so Senator
we're trying to deal with a
technical problem for a moment
we may skip over this presenter
and going to the others this is
give these guys a.
Just as.
You can disconnect the from the.
Audio hearing the justices the
next speaker.
Senator.
Your audience.
So okay so
that that cost.
Okay.
That's what we want that's how
you can if you have trouble
understanding of African
project.
The.
What audio clarity.
Yeah this feedback she was the
further details are yeah through
the speakers or through funding.
That come through.
Okay well this is the TV's don't
go through the speakers both of
the computer computer supposed
to go through the speakers so
can we.
The TV yeah you guys directly
from the TV we just have to make
sure that this is muted when you
on that so.
Yeah just so there's no feedback
for me if we go for that.
We need to look.
Yeah.
Have more.
What was the keyboard for this.
Hey can you hear me now.
It's clarity audio seems like
that number.
So this is the one all right
miss Butler can you hear me.
Confirm that
Yeah a lot of new.
That number.
You.
yeah.
Okay sure he could you try
again.
Yeah area.
This is a much better would you
do would you do us a favor we're
we're still having a few I. T.
problems we've got a team over
here working would you would you
do this for us we just try to
make a concerted effort to maybe
Spiegel slowly of and that might
help some as well but we'll go
back to you please resume thank
you.
Here for the third.
When choosing where you left
off.
It and it
would be an
that that at eight.
It is
important for the.
There.
You work at the heart of these
people will have more energy and
sorry
but the more lines for a wire
writing about thirty thousand
four hundred listening
appropriations.
We have.
Fire at that location is that.
This page at least fifteen.
And for years that.
It is clear that interesting
only way to ensure that
this process.
Working for
that office simply at the
predicted that is.
That that
is forty eight.
It's C. the representative that
was valid and.
The best way of discerning.
you for that too low for.
It has been great to see you
there very in a way.
Hi.
It.
Right here with the story that.
Regular training for all the
fire.
Members.
You very
rarely mortgages.
The project and.
Wires right.
Right where is.
Required as part of their very.
Thanks
for taking care of us training
on.
And
do what it is.
It has.
Increase.
Show us that yes.
That that would be interested
or.
President.
It.
As we move into the state is.
I
would hope ascertain if there
is.
It
is
eight.
For information.
Hey.
It.
The.
Members of the legislature and.
This.
The committee the house.
Background.
for state.
While I.
It is
helping that okay this is a.
And
it actually really that the
decision making for your all of
is
that the usage that.
Officials that the.
The past.
Hi this.
The.
The
state
taxes that.
The.
It is.
Attention
committee for.
Currently.
Eight are.
Here
we have.
All data for that issue and
communicate there have always.
And if they and for to ensure
that all aspects of the project
in New Mexico.
Thank you we appreciate yes I
did the numbers of the committee
and of legislators in this
chamber for heating to.
Details.
At.
Thank you very much was Boller
in this nice we actually were
able to get the closed caption I
guess the to your presentation
so we're able to fall most of of
the spelling of my name
this.
The of the the I I can summarize
your point to move will ask you
to stand by and come back
questions were done we really
with all the presentations but
I heard you to make your first
point that that this tool
requires validation number one
and and to be regular to be a
regular.
And systematic assessment of the
pool I think we're gonna find
them that we may be lacking in
New Mexico they're probably
sorely lacking.
The second required training you
said with the measures seven
point and then you may madam
points on the fact that it seems
like we're not alone New Jersey
is been here before and
confronted some of the same
issues that adjusted modify the
tool to perhaps address
different policy goals in in
other priorities so I appreciate
all of that it'll be interesting
learn more about their jerseys
experience compared to our own
the next presentations by honest
Pepin director Representative
administrative office the courts
but the.
You Mr chair of my voice I think
you're getting some materials.
Provided to the committee.
I thought I would go through to
begin with maybe.
What this what the public safety
assessment actually looks like
with a judge sees.
And how it's used on the bench
and then talk about some data
related to of both validation
and experience over the last
five years in Albuquerque
relative to the assessment given
by the public safety assessment
tool.
So I want to start.
With this this call HB seventy
four attachment.
It was written for a house bill
that's pending and but it
summarizes how the PSA works
have a public safety system
works there are two things in
the state to begin with that is
the public safety assessment
does not.
Recommend release for the tanker
decay.
It doesn't have anything to do
with the tension it does not
recommend.
He can or not to take what the
public safety assessment does
recommend based on the criminal
defendants history.
And circumstances the current
age and things like that
what kind of supervision would
provide the maximum probability
that they would succeed if
they're released.
You know the constitution says
every defendant has to be
released.
Exception.
The the the the district
attorney moves for detention and
it's standard for detention but
every other case we don't have a
detention motion Jeff has to
release the defendant under some
kind of conditions and that's
what the public safety says was
forced to give the judge Hey of
the based on the history and all
the science behind the public
safety assessment what.
Supervision level would give
that defend the best chance of
succeeding what is success pre
trial there are two things one
that the here for their
scheduled court appearances
that's the FDA right.
For the appearance right FTA
failure to appear and we're
short handed without and then I
want to talk about and the other
is that they not be arrested for
new criminal activity MCA is the
term used in the field new
criminal act.
The at all the researchers will
tell you that arrest is not a
really good substitute for
criminal activity because a lot
of people get arrested for
things they never get convicted
of but it's the best we have so
we use a rest so success is
don't FDA don't get an NCAA
don't get in the criminal charge
don't feel too piece.
share control over the acronyms
again for us nine years so I can
understand it and.
So the public safety assessment
also called the P. S. A. which
is colloquially referred to by
many as Arnold pool because it
was developed my own ventures
based on this research
Failure to appear this is yes
okay.
The new criminal activity is and
see a the another term all use
in a minute when I show you this
actual
report and it's in the CAA
violent criminal activity that's
where you get what's called the
violence flag on the report
you'll see that also in a minute
so you get the NPCA find people
with a violent history in the
NCAA which is the risk of a new
criminal activity and you have
FDA which is the risk of not
appearing for all your schedule
of court appearances thank you
very thank you Mr so the first
phase about the history Arnold
told have developed and the
public safety assessment rather
but I would like you to look at
the second page at the top of
which you'll see the line
factors that make up the public
safety assessment.
The the evaluated hundreds of
thousands of cases cases that
have been finished and they
looked at what would have
predicted.
Likely success on the pre trial
period for a defendant in those
cases and they looked at
hundreds this is our land there
are hundreds of possibilities
they lived in the neighborhood a
long time they were married they
had a job whatever it is and it
turns out that there are nine
factors that are highly
predictive to the extent you can
predict the behavior of New
Mexico and you see those nine
factors there on the page some
of them relate to FTA failure to
appear risk similar to NCAA and
some relate to M. D. C. A. the
violence.
The other thing you have in this
participate in this document are
the fifty one crimes that are
qualified as violent crimes in
Albuquerque this isn't of the
decision made locally based on
what all the parties in the
system thank should be listed as
a violent crime and when that
decision was made and involves
the district attorney the public
defender the criminal defense
bar the courts.
That jails.
moon I don't remember lots of
people the basically the people
on your criminal justice
coordinating council so that's
the that's how Arnold to the
public safety assessment came to
be based on that research okay.
What is it when is it due for us
the other.
I want to point out.
This document as well it's Q.
it's lovely it's a summary of
the public sector session what
the main thing there is you got
these documents electronically
and there's a link in this
document to this thing the
validation study done by doctor
Garrett is here and others
where.
In June of two thousand twenty
one they published a study
of the vote to on the secretary
what was being talked about a
few minutes ago that is validate
whether the.
Public safety assessment as
applied in Bernalillo county was
being productive for FDA and
CFDA and whether it was being
biased by gender by race in in
the first instance of the
country I think of for native
population with a bicycle it's
in need of American population.
What they found was its value
it's a good predictor for NCAA
and FTA and it is not biased as
is being planned for we account.
At that time that validation
study was based on
over ten thousand cases we now
have about fifteen thousand
cases and we have things have
changed in terms of of the rates
applied and it's about the lady.
So what we're talking about when
we talk about a public safety
assessment with the judge look
at.
Ask you to look at this
document.
What you're looking at there is
excuse me.
The safety assessment as it's
presented to a judge in
Bernalillo county.
Then you see on the bottom you
this is made up by years not a
actual person.
first of all affects the little
tour and flag this person is
violence way because of the
history.
And you go down to the boxes and
receivers left to right new
criminal activity scale in CA.
And from bottom to top it to
yield superior scale FTA the
lower you go on the FDA scale
the more risk you have the for
the right to go on the NCAA
scale more risk you have friends
here.
There are two mistakes in the
way that I I I believe there are
two states that the way we use
the public safety assessment
earlier County.
In this in this matrix.
They are first of all that the
red boxes state detained for Max
conditions.
Back in twenty seventeen
actually before the Arnold the
PSA was publicly available we
were a pilot site
I agreed and it was a it was the
worst mistake I've made in pre
trial I think.
With the at the this is really
one of the red boxes to safety
team.
And finally two weeks before we
started using it I agreed and
that was a mistake it should not
say anything because the public
sector system is not
recommending release twenty ten
in fact we run the public safety
assessment before the everybody
knows is a case because when a
person gets arrested.
We run the public safety
assessment immediately so the
judge the next morning or early
afternoon when they have that
person in front of them we'll
have this document to have
evidence before them that they
can use in assessing what
conditions of release to propose
because remember the making of
rescission unless district
attorneys filed a motion to
detect.
But in every other jurisdiction
we have implemented in in New
Mexico and that's fifteen other
counties besides Bernalillo will
be eighteen I guess soon.
there is no detained box the
highest level of recommendation
by the PSA elsewhere is PML four
PM help sorry another mediation
you see these PML panel of this
box that is the pre trial
monitoring level.
That is when you're going to be
released.
How closely are we going to
monitor this defendant what
level of attention this is the
front need to give us the best
shot that they will get arrested
again or they will Mr court
dates.
So.
In every other jurisdiction you
would see a PML level
recommended they're not detained
or Max conditions panel four is
the highest level of supervision
we have but it wouldn't say that
it would just a piano for.
the other mistaken here's that
all the boxes state are are
listed recommending Mr Hamid
teen in the months after the red
boxes and that should be there
either technically yes release
and reconnaissance where the you
have no supervision or intense
supervision because we're not
assigning someone to follow you
around well this one that looked
out of my but.
You're on your own but when we
put our our and it gives
everybody the idea that there's
no attention being paid to the
defendants were released and
that's really misleading because
of PML three or panel for panel
to they all carry with them
degrees of supervision by
pretrial services and by the
courts so we will be working
with are just as partners to fix
this box because a lot more like
boxes we've used elsewhere we
didn't start elsewhere until
twenty nineteen we learned a lot
between seventeen and nineteen
we need to circle back and fix
the way this is used and it
greatly misleads the public and
the press because they see a
recommendation protection for
the system charge with this
year's prime and they're in a
yellow box or large box and
brought in the red box with a
should be taken so that's the
that's what the judge sees when
they get out of public safety
assessment report the CPC here.
in the county little different
in other counties that's a six
point scale objects six left
right success.
Six six is the highest risk
level you can have.
The next page for the back page
of foods to Senate I think these
copies you have R. two side is a
background investigation report
the judge also has this when
they're on the bench seeing that
person for the first time I got
arrested last night and they're
deciding.
Conditions to put on the person
for release.
The I. R..
I say that that's background of
this case report is a criminal
history of the defendant it
shows that they failed to appear
it shows that they were on
probation there are
appropriations to that
violations that shows all the
criminal history of a defendant
and the judge has this when they
decide conditions of release by
the way if the district attorney
for ADA is present in court they
have this one that whether they
are not we send it to them and
the same thing for defense
attorney public defender they
get to get these documents as
well.
That's what the from the judge
in terms of documentary evidence
when the judge makes a decision
on these but if you look at if
you were to look at rule I for
one which is pre trial release
rural drive by the Supreme Court
you would see in the section C.
and D. of the of the rules that
it's just when the judges
deciding about release they can
consider the Supreme Court
approved risk assessments and
whatever has to say in this case
public safety assessment.
Things are a whole lot of other
things one to six
part three has to some parts a
lot of things that the judge is
also considering besides just
what's in the boxes what's on
the.
Investigation report.
Then when the judges deciding
what conditions will pose the
PML a certain supervised by
levels right but section do Raul
has thirteen categories of
things the judge might want to
do.
I think the could be drug
testing tell the McKenna firearm
could curfew on lots of things
the last which is whatever else
you think is going to help this
defendant Market rearrested and
show up to court comply with the
conditions of release so that is
a misperception that the public
safety assessment somehow binds
the judges to whatever
recommendation it's making and
that somehow decides that
recommends release release it
does not recommend relation not
released it recommends this is
the level the history of this
defendant tells us.
that would maximize the
likelihood of success if when
they're released and they are
released last there's a motion
for detention.
Most of the tensions in the
different rule I for and I'm not
talking about the tension here
the judge would of course still
have a public safety assessment
when this motion for detention
because we do that then
everybody that's arrested but
there's a lot of the things most
of which are brought in by the
district attorney about why a
particular individual despite a
public safety assessment assess
PM all two or three needs to be
held until trial because they
are a threat to public safety or
to a particular victim and
therefore they need to be
checked and I think just the
Chief Justice mentioned inner
state of the judiciary address
that's happened earlier County
alone over three thousand times
in the last five years three
thousand people who care bonded
out under the old system who now
are became but that's that's not
the PSA public sector session so
I really should be talking about
it.
We can also talk about real five
four three what you do if
someone violates the conditions
that the judge sets after that
initial appearance
but that doesn't have to do with
the oral to either because when
they come back with a violate
the conditions it just sits just
follows the public sector
session which on a P. and L.
three level supervision
supervision violate you don't
show a few appointments for
any of the other conditions you
violate the district attorney
can bring a motion for the judge
can on his or her own motion
summons the defendant back in
court for violation of
conditions of release to support
order and based on a
preponderance of evidence that
you violated the conditions of
the lease.
Thank you Senator jail revoked
release for impose any other
conditions that are necessary
for
To protect any witnesses for for
the good for the proper
administration of justice yes
Representative right twenty five
I'm sorry summarized for me
please you exceeded fifteen very
sorry.
Well I give you a lot of that Mr
Chairman which I hope that you
get a chance to look at what it
tells you is as the public
safety assessment increases its
assessment of the risk of an
individual and that person was
released we have more failures
the higher the risk right make
sense invalidated study that you
need to expect people and see
who are risk one.
Love your violations and people
who are risk
six.
Also in this document you will
find.
What happens when someone is
arrested when they're on pre
trial release similar count what
has happened over the last five
years what you'll find is that
the arrests for crimes are
overwhelmingly for fourth degree
felonies misdemeanors and petty
misdemeanors very few third
degrees make up a little bit
very few second first degree
address.
For those charges the NCAA's are
rarely a first or second degree
you'll also see how often in
these in this data how often
it's a violent crime to get
arrested for as opposed to our
property.
Okay that's helpful Mr chair
thank you for the question.
Next the the awful then this
special counsel attorney
general's office.
Mr Mendis.
Thank you for joining us.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my
name's level for women this I'm
special counsel to the Attorney
General.
In my
Previously since that between
twenty seventeen through the end
of last year I was a chief
policy and planning for the
district attorney's office in
Albuquerque.
So I've experienced
the Arnold tool from its
inception through the end here
I'll share with you with the
committee a presentation they've
put together and largely it
tracks with miss bottlers
comments
in terms of some of the
potential improvements to the
Arnold pool and some of the
challenges that are we confront
with the Arnold pool.
so hopefully everybody can see
it on the screen there.
But I'd like to start by.
Connect can I take a moment to
encourage those who bears it
right direction further you can
do to move to the side of the so
the audience please thank you.
Well since the since you moved I
can see the screen and I'll
never be able to read but anyway
so.
I'll provide copies of the what
we're seeing that complications
in that okay this is a of a flow
chart of the criminal justice
system that the B. J. as put
together just to provide context
of how complex a system is the
to the two circles of the next
are the two points in the flow
that I'll talk about and anchor
my comments around but on the
far left Mr chair what you see
is this large this is crime if
it's hard to see I know from
this distance but it says crime
and it's larger than any part of
the flow
and I will I want to spend a
little bit of time on that
because it gets to this this
notion of what the communities
experiencing compared to what
actually comes into the crowd
justice system.
So the community experience and
I'll provide copies of
afterwards the community
experiences crime at vast.
Just a greater numbers than what
actually hits the criminal
justice system so I have a two
examples one regarding violent
crime and one of regarding rape
and sexual assault.
we know that there to step down
see what actually hits the
criminal justice system are
compared with the community
experiences one is what gets
reported to law enforcement and
secondly is that which is
cleared law enforcement solves
it another refers it for
prosecution or close the case
there.
Four
violent crime the national
figures are about reported about
forty percent of the time so if
we start with crime with a
hundred crimes and we get a
hundred violent crimes that
forty percent reporting remains
that we're now talking about
forty crimes the clearance rate
for violent crimes nationally is
about forty five percent those
forty five practice for those
forty crimes now become nineteen
crimes so the community would
have experienced a hundred
violent crimes with the criminal
justice system would have been
would would would know about
would be these nineteen crimes
it's a little bit more dramatic
when we look at rape or sexual
assault because the reporting
rates are lower and the
clearance rates are lower so a
hundred rapes or assaults in our
community what
With the reporting rate of about
thirty four percent clearance
rate about thirty three percent
those hundred crimes that were
experiences a hundred hundred
rapes or sexual assaults or
experience in our community into
the coming eleven no crimes are
you still dealing with national
since these these yes yes Mr
chair these are these are
national figures and so every
community will have different
reporting of rates and different
clearance rates and there is
variation in reporting reaching
clearance rates depending on the
type of crime but the point I
want to share is that the
community expects parents of
crime is much greater than what
it to alternately starts hitting
the the criminal justice system.
In small numbers matter small
numbers impact public safety.
What we know from national
research is that it's a small
proportion of the city's
population that is responsible
for a big proportion of crime in
the community so this is a
research from Jon J.
the national network for safe
communities at John Jay college
in New York
they find that it's less than
one percent of the city's
population that's responsible
for about fifty percent of the
violence.
And so what we're seeing here is
what our experience was when I
was at the district attorney's
office taking the hard that it
is a small proportion of the
population that's responsible
for violence the motions to
detain work targeted at those
individuals that percent of
danger so over the the the the
years there from twenty
seventeen to the end of last
year there were over thirty
thousand adult felony defendants
that the district attorney's
office came into contact with.
And we moved to detain
approximately five thousand
individuals in that time period
so about sixteen percent.
Why that matters is.
Our concern as public safety of
professionals isn't the eighty
four percent that we do not
attempt to detain.
What we're trying to tune is for
those small numbers of that we
have attempted to detain.
And we're released because in
that population we see that it
that that it's about fifty
percent of the time that those
motions to detain were granted
in that population the folks
that we moved to detain and were
released we see them come back
into the system
one that one in five times and
we see that half of those are
coming back as violent crimes
and again we come back to the
site this notion that what the
community's experience is much
more than what what is hitting
the criminal justice system so
that we we can surmise that
there's much more impact in the
community then we'll we'll two
million.
This this is probably something
that we haven't of shared before
but what we our experience with
the Arnold tool in our judges
and in Bernalillo county was
that there was strong adherence
to the recommendations of the
Arnold pool what you see you
heard from Mr Pepin the
description of what the the
acronyms are and see a new
criminal activity FTA of the
failure to appear and what you
see in these bar charts at the
bottom there's the count of how
many occur how many motion
sitting were in these categories
but you see the grant right
these are nearly linear so that
the higher the score the more
likely there was for detention
so that was strong adherence to
the Arnold tools scoring.
And this held true even among
the judges that granted the
most.
And the team and and granted the
least so the bar chart on the
left it's also linear right it's
the lower the score there are no
score in here we're only looking
at the new criminal activity
score the lower the score the
less likely they were to be seen
the higher the score the more
likely they were to be detained
but we're seeing on the left are
the two judges with the lowest
grant right and we're seeing on
the right are the two judges
with the highest grant right and
we're seeing is that there and
they're here to the Arnold score
but they have different
baselines as to how to interpret
what the Arnold scores telling
them so that when this mother
was talking about training and
interpretation of the artist
court that at it resonated with
me because we saw this
experience of.
To speak to separate into two
different populations of judges
interpreting that Arnold scored
differently but still it hearing
to its recommendation.
What ends up happening this next
chart is
Do we end up with widely
inconsistent decisions on
detention by judge so this is
anonymize we don't know which
judges which but the judge that
grants the most requests at
about seventy two percent the
judge that grants the least
friends at about thirty percent
so we in the past have have any
situation where a strong
indicator of whether or not an
individual is going to be
detained isn't necessarily their
history and their their pattern
but which judges are getting and
how they're interpreting
Department score.
And we see this pattern also
with types of crimes.
So.
Here on the low end and and to
me is is shockingly on the low
end.
Child abuse cases regret being
granted at thirty two percent of
the time.
Thomas I just make sense to me
there grant at the high end
seventy nine percent of time
homicide comes through it's
granted but things like weapons
violations are below that fifty
percent mean so we have
inconsistent detention decisions
also facing crime types and they
may be inconsistent with the
expectations of the public about
what they.
I believe should make them safe
and this body has an opportunity
as the voice of the people to
articulate what should matter in
the past we have the that we
talked about the potential of
rebuttable presumptions and
there's been question about the
constitutionality of that if
they are used every day in
federal court just a judge prior
when he was on for circuit
funding not to be constitutional
but we don't need to talk about
that today because there's a
miss Butler actually suggested
another way to do it and I know
highlighted.
But I I do want to share with me
and I apologize that so far when
small but I'm gonna share with
you a few examples of of the
Arnold pool and I think Mr chair
right pass up my.
We'll have some help you do
that.
Thank you.
It'll it'll be easier to read
there but on the left we have
Mister Solomon Pena Mr chair you
referenced earlier and what
would for to to go around so we
can you can you can Senator be
legible.
This is the individual recently
accused of shooting up elected
officials it seems.
And I might as well pass this as
well Mr chairman.
This is a.
Well as miss Butler reference
this is new Jersey's decision
making framework.
will discuss New Jersey's
decision making framework in a
sector but it was amended as of
August of last year so it's it's
relatively fresh in terms of
their thinking and their
discussion evolution to through
the use of the our tool.
And.
This this the flight I'm on is
right after the charts I I've
been titled it real world
examples and and there will be
but also share with you with
that the committee of the total
for real with real world
examples.
So with Mr Solomon Pena he
scored and and the new criminal
activity scale that NCA scale he
scored a three.
One of the charges that he was
charges was will he was charged
with four counts of shooting at
a dwelling or occupied building.
And at the bottom of the I I
have highlighted in yellow the
recommendation
from the Arnold tool in
Bernalillo county which was are
well releases on reconnaissance
but as Mr pepper noted PML to
the pre trial monitoring level
two.
On the right we have another
individual
who also scored a new criminal
activity score of three.
Who also had a charge of
shooting at a dwelling or
occupied building.
and in addition this individual
had of the new violent criminal
activity flight the NCAA the
that was lifted up on to alert
the judge that that this
individual.
That would them added up all the
factors and added that flags to
called to the judge's attention.
Individual left Mr Pena his
motion to detain was granted
individual on the right his
motion to detain was denied.
Similar crimes.
and arguably the one on the
right had a little of factor
that should have kicked it up
but it was it was not.
Not granted I'm sorry what Regis
denied that the motion to detain
was the night so the individuals
released Mr chair that's correct
yes.
On the next page we have the
real world examples of Mr Sayed
And.
He was had to come to vote
counts of murder in the first
degree.
And the
thank you.
These are the murders that took
place in the Muslim community
that's correct Mr chair.
so at the with the matrix in and
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county the way it stands now he
did not have a criminal history
sufficient to have of a high
score on the Arnold pool he came
back with a recommendation of
PML one.
And this is a gap that I think
Miss bottler was referencing in
in terms of what New Jersey did
right New Jersey recognize it if
individual individual does not
have a long history they're
going to end up with a very low
score just using the algorithm
so New Jersey did was
take that into consideration and
that steps and and I'll get into
that a little bit but you can
see how an individual scores low
and ends up with a
recommendation from the pool
that doesn't seem to coincide
with the the violence of that
individual's Act and certainly
does not match with the public's
expectations of what keeps them
safe.
the individual the rate is
actually one of the more tragic
instances in our in our in our
state in our community
that he had the pin number a
motion to detain him.
at the time of this pre trial
assessment
he had been shooting at dwelling
or occupied buildings just as
the previous two examples I
shared his the tool recommended
release in all these instances
that the district attorney's
office had attempted to detain
him recognizing that these
individuals present a danger of
but the tool recommended release
and he was released
unfortunately a few months later
he was accused of going on an
armed robbery spree and
murdering a young man in our
community so again this this the
small numbers matter and it's
it's difficult to overestimate
the catastrophe of that kind of
violence for a family
a neighborhood in a community so
those those those small matters
small numbers are tremendously
important matter so a percentage
point here there sounds small
but they matter they have impact
in our community.
It's K..
the individual the right hand
side can you know which was
which case was just Mr chair is
this a was Mr Bevin offered he
was on ankle monitor when you
plan on administrative.
and.
This is my I guess my.
Second to last slide it again
it's small but you on the left
what you have is basically page
one of the New Jersey decision
making framework that I provided
to the the committee Mr chair.
And
And I and I almost I I.
I was the committee that not
coordinate with this bottler but
my suggestion is to add steps
like New Jersey and other
jurisdictions
other jurisdictions in bed the
Arnold tool in a decision making
framework and and in doing that
process they go through step
state yes the complete the R. O.
tool to complete the PSA.
But in New Jersey for example
step two they would ask is the
person coming in on a murder and
if the answer is yes.
Yes the recommendation the final
recommendation is no release
recommended
and they have a similar matrix
to the one that Mr have insured
with the committee they have
their red boxes as well and
their red boxes say no release
recommended
because we do see that the
judges follow the guidance
strongly
And if if with the other three
individuals the other three
interviews they shared we would
be able to get through step two
because none of those crimes
applied we really get to step
three none of those kinds of I
totally get to step seven
instead of seven we would end
and again this is using New
Jersey statute.
But in step seven we would run
into possession of a weapon for
unlawful purposes in
that would that would match the
kind of activity that we saw in
terms of people out the
individuals shooting at at two
under don't dwelling occupied
unit and there then get to
answer yes if yes the final
recommendation is no release
recommended so all of those
individuals under that decision
making framework would have had
that guidance to the judge of no
release recommended and we know
that there Senate bills seventy
four and we know that there
Senate bill one R. S. our house
bill seventy four and Senate
bill one twenty three of it
could the legislature Mr chair
could very easily.
Get the get the statutes that
the those sponsors have a
identified as as very dangerous
activity in our community and
give and get the New Jersey
decision making framework and Dr
those and put them in various
steps and recruitment thank you
commitment is let me ask you to
summarize quickly so we can move
on a couple of other presenters
I'm sure they'll be questions
for you coming up Mr chair I I
think I I think I'm echoing what
miss Butler said in terms of
training I think I'm echoing
what you said in terms of
thinking about something like a
decision making framework that
is not rebuttable presumptions
would provide the kind of
guidance to judges that would
improve decision making as to
those small numbers because it's
the small numbers that matter of
in terms of
who who we're move trying to
move to detain and we're trying
to protect the community from
thank you if ever there was
tremendous your your suggestion
there's an alternative maybe a
better alternative rebuttable
presumptions of you're still
working with the attorney
general's office is that right
today.
That's correct but there is an
alternative.
thank you Mr thank you very much
Mr bought a.
Public defender's office.
You're you're getting situated
for mystery but I'm I'm I've got
to tell you you know my favorite
line is always from cool hand
Luke what we have here is a
failure to communicate I just
heard you describe will come
back questions whatever you
describe it I saw a lot of
through the presentation the
article makes recommendations
for release and I I believe I
heard is seven say they are a
little does not make
recommendations for release a we
we can't even agree on that
basic concept so you can
understand why those of us that
don't do criminal on those of us
in the legislature very positive
and we can't even agree whether
this this model tool recommends
release or not.
Hope you all can understand even
at the fundamental level we
can't get agreement on some
basic principles so Mister
water.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
the opportunity Senators again
my name is Jonathan but I work
for the public defenders and
I've done a lot of work on pre
trial detention issues generally
really what I think because a
lot of what I would want to say
Mr Pathan RT set and I I expect
drive more to say I think we
need to talk about what the PSA
actually is it's a risk
assessment instrument right it's
it's about helping judges figure
out how much risk a person is at
and this isn't the only type of
risk assessment instrument out
there and we don't only use risk
assessment instruments in
criminal justice systems the
most obvious types of risk
assessment instruments that we
all know it use our insurance
companies so we're making
analogy about what we're talking
about here to insurance
companies would do when they're
deciding how much it's going to
cost somebody who wants to get
life insurance from
so let's talk about two
different thirty four year old
males we know that an insurance
company can say well the average
thirty four year old male is
going to live this long but
they're not everybody's an
average thirty four year old
male so we have one thirty four
year old male who is athletic
lives up nice clean lines he
doesn't smoke very rarely drinks
doesn't use drugs just clean
living kind of guy who are you
have a thirty four year old guy
who does smoke who does trained
who does use trucks who lives
kind of a frankly departure just
life those two people are going
to be evaluated differently by
an insurance company using their
risk assessment instruments
right we just know that we know
one person is going to be
considered to be more insurable
to cut be cheaper to insure than
the other person let's take it a
step further what we so we know.
Every insurance companies going
to deal with those two people
differently let's make these
people a little more extreme the
first thirty four year old guy
we have he's not just athletic
he's literally the first baseman
for the New York Yankees he's
not just healthy he literally is
no.
Worldwide as being a person who
never get sick who never gets
her who have lives lives his
life with integrity and he's you
know he's like an ideal person
to be insured the other thirty
four year old guy he's not just
kind of departures he is
literally a rockstar he's the
lead guitarist for one of the
most famous rock bands in the
world he's been arrested for
heroin he's he's kind of the
epitome of rockstar life okay
obviously these two people are
going to be treated differently
but the first person we didn't
we won't know when he's thirty
four but two years later he's
going to be forced to retire in
two years after that is going to
be dead from a LS because we're
talking about Lou Gehrig and the
second person he's going to be
you know we're gonna talking
about.
Keith Richards forty five years
ago.
Right.
When you're looking at
individual people.
You know it doesn't matter what
enhancement is going to say
because the individual people
have to be dealt with
individuals and risk assessment
instrument can't capture Lou
Gehrig you can't capture Keith
Richards that's not what it's
designed for it's designed to
give ideas about how these
people are generally going to go
forward so that's what we're
talking about with the PSA with
Arnold school we're not talking
about does the PSA on a one one
say this person is not going to
violate of course it doesn't say
that because they could never
say that because we're dealing
with people we're dealing with
fallible people we're dealing
with people who have plenty of
things coming from all different
directions who are coming to the
criminal justice system in
different ways disappear say say
the every six six percent is
going to violate of course not
we actually know most of them
don't but we know there are
higher risks to to violate and
the data that has been collected
over all these years shows that
the risk assessment instrument
in this case the Arnold tool
does a good job of showing that
the people who were one ones are
going to violate less often than
the people who are six sixes and
it's fairly linear that's what
it's designed to do it's not
designed remotely to say release
everyone one percent and judges
don't do it so.
So it's really important to
remember that lowest risk
absolutely positively does not
mean no risk highest risk
absolutely positively doesn't
mean frankly high risk even the
highest risk people are
violating about thirty percent
of the time that's not okay but
it's not even most of the time.
It's it's a minority of the time
that those people are violating
so we have but it stays at
Lanier sure and is it helpful
that way sure.
So.
The question about how the PSA
works in regards to detention
cases as opposed to non
detention cases because we we
don't just get the PSA and
detention cases it's in every
single felony case Bernalillo
county that's how we get it is
in every single felony case and
the what the data shows and I
think doctor mark and speak to
this better than I can is that
people who are released after
detention hearing violate pretty
similarly to the people who they
didn't file for detention on
it's not like the state does an
incredible job of it determining
who they should of you know
moved to detain because frankly
the violations happen at a
almost exactly the same right.
And so so I I respectfully
disagree about targeted
detention motions when they're
filing motions to detain people
charged with possession of a one
one but because there's a gun in
the car the file for detention
and that happened more than once
by that administration so.
But really what we're looking at
is.
How.
What information can we give the
judges to help them I would also
note that it's true that judges
do tend to
rule.
Proximate Li the way that the
the line goes but eight it's not
entirely of the swim June of
twenty seventeen to December of
twenty twenty two from the time
we had a PSA all the way through
the end of last year there were
five hundred and ninety one
people who the state filed for
detention on who are the lowest
risk there were one one on the
PSA twenty two percent of the
time the judges granted a motion
in that case and it's not all
cases where they were mia
murders and things like that
some of them were the possession
cases so.
By definition those people who
are one one has no prior
convictions not so it should be
almost impossible for the state
to prove that they can't comply
with conditions of release under
the rules yet still almost a
quarter of the time judges help
those people because they didn't
care with the PSA said the
thought no this is a person we
need a whole.
There were five hundred and
forty four people who were six
sixes on the PSA and oversights
that the five hundred and of
those five hundred forty four
percent over seventy five
percent of those were granted
and because judges said well
these people there the ask for
various reasons we need to hold
up did they hold all of them
know because they're looking at
the cases individually like
they're supposed to do.
So hi I want to say I agree with
Mr happen obviously that the R.
O. R. shouldn't be on the PSA
the PSA is designed for people
who are being released what
kinds of conditions of release
we want to put them on the it's
importance when we're talking
about supervising people who are
being released that best
practices state not only do you
not want to under supervised
people you don't want to over
supervised people and so the PSA
why they're putting those PM on
one's PML to that cetera in
there is because we don't want
to over supervised people it's
the help to just determine
conditions of release if
conditions of release are
granted not to determine whether
or not the person should be
held.
I think that.
When I want to go back to that
strong adherence to PSA I think
it's a chicken and question.
The PSA is just a reflection
almost entirely of a person's
criminal history and so you know
when they see a person is a six
and The New Yorker new criminal
activity that just means you
look at their history and you
can see they have these felony
convictions they have these
failures to appear days have
this pending case that they
picked up on their violated are
what what they got on the new
arrest and so.
Without the PSA the judges still
going to see that without the
PSA I can pretty much guarantee
you the line is still going to
be like this because they're
gonna it's gonna be hard to hold
people with no criminal history
and it's going to be easier to
hold people with a lot of
criminal history so I don't
think it's about the PSA the PSA
is just reflective of what the
person already has going on in
their lives the PSA isn't new
information is collated
information.
So
eight I want to be very clear
I've practiced this whole time
in courts and Bernalillo county
and I've done hundreds probably
of detention hearings judges do
not default to the PSA they just
don't do it.
Is it important some some more
to some than to others but.
They all every single one of
them we'll go contrary to the
PSA in a case where they think
they need to do that every
single one of them and so I
don't think that.
This the PSA is something that
needs to be overhauled or
anything like that I do think
taking out the R. or from there
would be good because I I think
it's clear which we're this is
talking about what happens if
we're releasing people but the
information that it gives judges
the types of factors that do
make people are risk is good
information we want to just to
have that we want judges to know
when these factors are there
this person is a higher risk.
And then you do with that judge
what you need to do and if
they're accused of some really
bad crime like Mr Pena is
accused of then hold him and
they did you know that.
The judges are always going to
do that they're always going to
do that and so I I think we just
need to be very clear about what
the PSA is and what it is not it
is not a release pool it is a
conditions of release tool.
So I don't think I have anything
else all right yeah we're still
so difference of opinion once
again.
Is it a release tool is another
I still don't have a good handle
on that so I understand your
position for the other positions
to the contrary
Mr Moore's mix please.
Thanks.
Mr Chairman centers thank you
very much for this opportunity
and thank you very much for your
service to the public I know
that you do not have an easy
job.
I am not a criminal justice or
legal scholar so on here is a
computer scientist to say and
some of it has just been said a
little bit about what the PSA is
and is not what it is that tools
or as we call them algorithms
what they can do and what they
can't do what they know and what
they don't know.
So.
If you turn I I do want to point
you too much to your hand those
but in Mr Pepin's handout page
to the inside of the very first
page it listed as nine factors
that he mentioned.
And I just want to drive home
the point that the PSA is told
very little about the defendant
and told very little about a
case it is not told the facts of
the case it is not told for
instance that the defendant
seems committed to political
violence and against the homes
and families of office holders
What it is not even told that
much in detail about their
criminal record it is not told
the specific charges for which
they've been convicted in the
past.
What is told is basically a
couple of numbers and a couple
of kind of yes or no questions
and you see them on that page it
does take the age of the
defendant into account because
it happens that that's strongly
predictive of certain kinds of
crime
it is told whether the current
offense third used up as a
violent offense or not it uses
that in the new violent criminal
activity flag that popped up on
one of the examples that Mr
Mendoza showed us
you just told whether there is a
pending charge at the time of
the offense but mostly as we
just heard from Mr Bora it's
based on prior convictions and
even there it simply did you
have one or how many did you
have.
How many misdemeanor committed
convictions in the past how many
felony convictions how many
violent offense convictions.
Failures to appear a past
sentences to incarceration that
is all that's told.
So when you think about the PSA
it's taking the rich detailed
facts about a crime in about a
defendant squeezing them through
a very narrow channel and doing
what it can with that very
limited simple information now
this is by design.
You know I think you we hear a
lot in the in the media about
you know machine learning and
artificial intelligence.
We we have shows I don't and if
you see in person of interest to
our computer miraculously
miraculously projects and ninety
seven percent chance of a
violent confrontation that's not
what's going on here the PSA
takes that information and does
a very simple statistical
calculation it's a point system
that any of us could fill out
with pencil and paper.
So for each prior conviction of
each type each family or
misdemeanor violent offense the
defending gets a certain number
of points you add them up to see
what range of points there in
and that's how you get for
instance this one two three four
five or six and then for
slightly different things
preferences putting more weight
on prior failures to appear
there's another one three six
four for failure to appear.
So what what is it doing it as
Mr of our described it is a
little bit like an insurance
company which is basing it it's
it's basing its decision not on
an individual defendant for an
individual crime but rather
statistically on the average
behavior of thousands of
defendants that have a similar
criminal record.
That's what is doing no more and
no less and so as a result from
my point of view as a scientist
what it gives us is an estimate
again if that average chance
that they will be re arrested
for some new crime during the
control period.
So if you look again I don't
want you to these two things the
things too much but on page
thirty you see some of our
charts.
So these come from some of our
validation studies.
they're broken out by the type
and severity of crimes
misdemeanors first through
fourth degree felony and so on
as Mister Patton mentioned you
can see that it's doing a decent
job so the people on the left of
the people it's giving a score
of one and they are all
refunding during pre trial
getting rearrested less than
half as often as the average
felony defendant and the ones
over here that it's giving a
score of six are roughly twice
the average from the defendant.
But again quality delivering it
is an average of defendants with
that type of record it's not
it's not looking any more deeply
or in the in anymore
individualized way it can't
okay.
So.
No you could ask him what good
is.
I think that this kind of you
know information about the
average behavior of a kind of
defendant with a certain number
of priors a typical defendant
with a certain number of priors
I think it's good for the judge
to have that information
different judges are going to
use it in different ways summer
going to ignore it so we're
going to taken into account but
is multiple people of said.
On when you were looking at the
release and detention decision.
And here I guess I'm speaking a
little bit more as a citizen and
less as a scientist should you
be able to detain me based on
statistics.
In other words you should you be
able to detain me based on the
average behavior of defendants
whose record looks similar to
mine or should you as the
constitution says have to bring
individualized information about
me and about my case and
convince the judge that as an
individual I would pose a danger
to the public for these.
And I think that's what you're
hearing so much to try to
separate these two these two
years right the first is the yes
or no question detain to release
the second question is all right
well what is your what is the
average probability that you
will re offend if released and
based on that what kind of
supervision do you need do you
need a GPS anklet do you need
regular drug test you need
regular check ins and so on do
you need better text messaging
to get you to court.
So
you know.
You've already referred to the
case of Mr Pena and I think I
and many others in this room and
in the state would agree would
say that the system worked there
keep in mind the system is not
just the PSA it is that
individualized system of motions
to detain so like many others
I'm glad he was detained I look
at some of these other examples
that are tragic and I think
it's.
Nobody out there is very good at
predicting crime at and that is
true of humans it is true of
algorithms and there are
mistakes tragic mistakes made on
both sides there are people who
are detained unnecessarily who
lose custody of their kids in
their jobs in their house there
are others who should have been
detained and go out and do
something terrible would have as
Mr Mendez ultimately set a
catastrophic effect on a family
and a community so.
As you are designing policy.
All I would ask is that keep in
mind that when you're designing
policy you're not judging
individual cases like the ones
we saw your casting a net around
thousands of defendants and
saying something about what we
should do with that entire group
of defendants.
So just to finish up on.
You know you could say will
maybe the PSA isn't the right
net.
What is our that's our other and
lots of very you know well
motivated bills will many people
have said well let's base it in
different ways on the charge and
so on and I want to give one
example because it is one of the
criteria suggested for instance
is Senate bill one twenty three
and it also came up in the last
session in statute there's a
list of serious violent offenses
so it is very intuitive and very
understandable to say let's
detain the people who are
charged with a serious violent
offence.
Well we found for instance that
among those people the fraction
of them who are rearrested four
of our availability during pre
trial is four percent.
If you include violent
misdemeanors that some of the
three percent and then there's
some were re arrested for
nonviolent things no four
percent is not nothing those are
crimes that are having a
terrible effect on someone.
On the other hand if you looked
at all felony defendants the
whole shebang which and no one
is proposing detaining also only
defendants for them is three
percent.
So remember these six is over
here are about twice as likely
as the average felony defendant
to be rearrested during pre
trial the people who are are
accused of an SVO are only very
slightly more likely four
percent versus three percent for
being arrested.
So.
You know again I'm not a
criminal justice I'm not a legal
scholar for me if you don't mind
my.
This doesn't sound like a sort
of academic COVID.
The fascinating thing.
About law and crime and and I
and the fascinating balancing
act that you have to perform as
policy makers is that their
individual cases were if
prosecutors and defense
attorneys and judges who are
looking as closely as they can
at what happened there and who
that defendant is but then you
have policies that affect groups
of thousands.
When you make those policies
that affect groups of thousands.
It is about numbers it is about
statistics it is about false
positives and false negatives is
kind of like if you were a
public health official deciding
should you approved a new drug
renew vaccine you would have to
think well it's going to save
this money lies is going to harm
that realize is going to make
this many errors that are false
positives this many errors or
false negatives.
It may sound try and heartless
and statistical but I would
argue that when you're designing
policies that affect thousands
you have to look at numbers at
the same time when you're a
judge or prosecutor or defense
attorney then you're looking at
those individual cases as
closely as you can I think of
that is two years of the system
I think of it partly as the
Legislative versus the judicial
and so to some to sum up.
The PSA does a pretty good job
of predicting that average
behavior as we heard just a
moment ago no one is an average
person should we detain everyone
who gets a high score no should
we release everyone who gets a
low score no.
They're going to be people with
very few prior is where the
prosecutor doesn't excellent
evidence that they're dangerous
they're gonna be people with a
ton of priors where the defense
attorney can say well they've
completed education
rehabilitation rehabilitation
programs and let me tell you
judge their less dangerous than
you would think given their
record and I'm glad that that
leader of the system is there
and when it comes to that
release or detain question I
think that's the layer which
that decision should be made.
So thank you very much thank you
for.
Mr quicker than I was Santa Fe
is to remind us again in one
minute what's the Santa Fe
institute are the Santa Fe
institute is an
interdisciplinary research
institutes are halfway up
because of this road it studies
social systems and all sorts of
things there economists there on
their computer scientist like me
there and many others I want to
make it clear that I'm speaking
as an individual here not on
behalf of the institution thank
you thank.
All right.
Committee interesting.
Hopefully some.
Provocative thoughts members the
committee questions.
When we started nobody wants to
do is go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair I have I have
some questions for Mr Pappas.
Mister chair Mister haven't but
I think we are we've we've heard
a lot about how critical
training is on the screen what
kind of training is being
provided and to who.
I'm sorry Mr chair Senator.
I'm sorry.
Issue requires an awful lot of
training so as we go to the site
we train the judges and
everybody in the system on the
on the hoping to assistant to
the public safety system.
You provided funding this last
section and we took sixty sixty
four
seventy thank you for judges and
staff to the national conference
on pre trial so they can all get
training they went to a lot of
excellent trainings while
they're to learn more about
every aspect of pre trial to
include risk assessments which
and how to use.
I agree one hundred percent I'd
love to have the ability and in
fact may be required to train
those outside the judiciary
about.
It will the use of the PSA
because it is gravely
misunderstood I think we do we
do train internally
of all of our folks the
judiciary folks in the use of
the Arnold tool in every other
aspect of pre trial
That's what I guess if yes we
about tree right.
Kelly if you want to add this is
Kelly Bradford she's the
statewide program manager for
pre trial services and not only
is her knowledge better than
mine have voices better and so I
think maybe she has something
that that I'm having trouble.
Thank you ten Senator we do
quite a bit of training so in
each one of our AOC pre trial
sites and we are fully
implemented ten counties were
working with additional seven we
create what we call pre trial
implementation committees those
committees consist of District
Court judges magistrate judges
the jails dust PED's folks in
the county victim advocates
really the whole comprehensive
players with the trial justice
system and we take about six to
nine months and that's actually
fairly quick if and some of our
sites for the longer than that
because it really is all about
training lane foundation upon
foundation of pre trial justice
what it is what is a risk
assessment what is it do what is
it not to and then we actually
dive into the public safety
assessment itself as part of
that prior to launch we require
training with magistrate judges
and District Court judges and we
always offer training sessions
to the district attorney's
offices and the local public
defender's offices so it is a
huge piece of it because when we
are we say we could turn it all
on tomorrow but if you don't
understand it then you're not
going to understand how to use
it within the pre trial just the
system so it's something that I
spend a lot of my time doing is
working with the local
stakeholders and the pre trial
implementation committees that
then transition to oversight
committees once they are fully
launched.
And Mr chair and I'm sorry my
for profit this leads provide a
listening record traffic agency
budget I you said you offer it
to the dust and PED's are those
offers accepted how often is
that training happening.
It does sometimes I would say we
really had a good session with
the DA's office on the third
judicial district along with
their local public defender's
office we've done trainings
we've been trying to do
trainings in the six but it's
really been scheduling that's
been an issue I prefer to do
this if we can do those in
person they make they they just
work better and with COVID that
made it a little bit more
difficult so this spring we're
getting ready to start
scheduling site visits to our
current jurisdictions that have
implemented and that's one of
the things that we want to be
able to do when we're there
locally is to do some of those
trainings.
And Mr chair is is this a one
time training or is this an
annual training how how
frequently are folks getting
districts I would say really
varies among jurisdiction
ideally we would like to do it
at a minimum is annually and
then as needed within a year if
they need it more than that and
so I think training training is
really essential to the whole
pre trial justice system because
you have new people coming into
the system all the time whether
it's prosecutors are public
defenders or judges or whatnot
so I think as much as we can
train we should.
And and I you just a moment ago
that you've been doing training
with the DA's office in third
District did in the third prior
to the launch in really County
only to be training session as
welfare so it is it is a
priority are you seeing
differences in how this tools
building and in the places where
you've been able to it to do
more trainings and do trainings
not just within the judiciary
but outside of the judiciary
I've seen any difference and and
how this tools being stand and
what difference of so and chair
and senator you know from the
data no because we were tracking
and collecting data from all of
our jurisdictions only have
really good data I would say
that you know every jurisdiction
every county is a little bit
different and so you have
different players within each
county but that's something
we're really watching because we
can tell from data if something
isn't working and when we
identify that something we don't
think is working that's when we
bring it back to those local
oversight committees and we have
those discussions and if we need
to retrain the we can come back
and retrain.
So I guess let me ask you.
Do you think this is working
well now.
chair Senator yes from the data
that we have in what we're doing
and all the other jurisdictions
it is successful there's always
room for improvement our goal is
to always maximize public safety
and maximize quarter parents so
we're always looking for areas
where we can improve whether it
be court date reminders I'm
doing better connections for
defendants to community services
those are always areas that
we're looking at but yes from
what we're seeing in the data
and outcomes this is working.
And Mr chair at I think this
kind of goes back to.
What you making as I feel like
we are here and.
A lot of contradictory
information out whether this was
actually a tool that recommends
attention or not.
What.
The way it's being used.
Do you think it's it's being
used as a tool to recommend
detention or or release as
opposed to just conditions of
release after that detention is
termination is been made in
chairman Senator the public
safety assessment is not used to
recommend really sort of tension
and that is how we train in and
every matrix's used across the
state you do not see language in
the matrix that would suggest
that we always tell folks and
and I'm sorry to interrupt you
but I guess what I'm asking I
understand that the intention of
it is not being used as as a
recommendation for detention or
release.
It sounds like in reality it
might be fifteen years that way
so I guess that's.
Mr chair Senator.
Looking looking at what you
provided us it's clearly saying
detained or or release I thank
you Mr chairman and senator
during the the only place
there's a risk of that this
Bernalillo county because of
that because it's portrayed for
detention because we have
reached a thing in there and
that's not right but what I
would tell you is.
If that's true if you took this
matrix from Bernalillo county
and you said red boxes are to
detain people than you would
think we would detain a lot more
people because if the judges are
are.
Tethered to the PSA and somehow
that's how they can only make
the decision not to tension you
think they do a lot more people
but they're right in line with
all the other counties in New
Mexico fifty percent get granted
fifty percent get them roughly
fifty six percent last year got
granted in Bernalillo county by
the way in New Jersey fifty four
percent get granted in forty six
percent get denied with this
decision made matrix that was
discussed before so if you were
being treated as a tool that
recommended tension.
The only place in New Mexico
could be seen to do that isn't
Bernalillo county and Bernalillo
county the data is consistent
with all those places were
doesn't recommend detention and
we train.
Exactly as Khalistan we don't we
training this is not the payment
to take it if you release this
is how you can maximize success
this is a whole different issue
and.
I agree that detention.
I I heard that small numbers
matter every single crime
especially involving a victim
who suffers harm we significant
would like to eliminate all.
But there are big numbers in the
kinds of activities that
apparently are being asked of
you let's detain everybody
charged with certain crimes even
though the five percent of them
are going to be just fine if you
leave me alone they're gonna
spend eight months fourteen
months in jail they're going to
lose that job they're going to
get evicted from their home and
it might be because COVID they
would.
In New Mexico in Albuquerque in.
You can't just say well we're
gonna stop every homicide if you
if we're gonna we would love to
be able to identify each
individual who if released we
get charge of homicide later I
give you data the one of the
other pieces that I gave you I
didn't go over before shows the
people identified by law
enforcement in Albuquerque is
responsible for murders in two
thousand twenty two.
There are seventy four of them
who survived in terms of the
workshop by police seventy
seven.
Twelve of them at the time of
the site has given K..
Five of those were misdemeanors
seven with felonies how many of
them have had a pre trial motion
for detention zero because you
can't you can't just say let's
let's figure out who's going to
commit homes the more
information judges have the
better on detention I I did
really compared to talk a lot
about potentially thank you
believe that I want but.
The tension is a different issue
than when we release people in
order to release most of them.
How do we make the community
safer and get them to contact
the court and this helps with
that.
I know that I I don't I and I I
I really liked a lot of what Mr
Moore you so here was saying
that.
Having these numbers is helpful
in general I think we but it
certainly should not be
dispositive and we need to do
that individual examination of
each case and I will I like this
New Jersey friends because I
think that it.
It.
This is seeking to to get to
that result seeking that to take
the information from the
consideration without it being.
With that in determining the
outcome necessarily
Is there any.
Is there is a see doing anything
to to develop a kind of
framework like this or or
framework in general it's not
like this.
Senator Senator.
Every place where we improvement
has a decision making framework
that involves the community in
deciding these kinds of things
we have not in any jurisdiction
develop a presumptive detention
based on the charge will and I
can be seen a lot of data
telling us if you charge or
something doesn't necessarily
mean that's not what I'm I'm
asking I'm not a fan of a
presumptive.
Either what I'm asking is is
there any consistent training
and and approaches that are
being provided to the judges of.
Here here are the steps you go
through so that we know that
this is the important permission
at the schools providing is
being used at the right at the
right time in that process.
Yes part of our training has to
do with what point is the PSA
available on the PSA and the
background investigation report
is available at the probable
cause event for the initial
liberty hearing in which judges
receive that they are told and
less there's a motion for
preventive detention this filed
at that point there's a release
to be made in the PSA is to be
used to guide whether defendant
one should be on supervision if
they are going to be on
supervision what level of
supervision might be most
appropriate for them and not all
judges follow that you can have
a defendant that comes in and
the score will be called PML to
pre trial monitoring level two
and the judge may put them on a
PML three or PML one and so it
really is left up to the judge
and their judicial discretion
and anything that they receive
from the public defender the
district attorney or the nature
of the charge itself with making
that decision of the release
type whether to release with
supervision or without
supervision I've been asked
before by dust can we use the
PSA for detention hearings and I
always tell them the PSA will
only show that some each
defendant group will has the
potential of succeeding there is
no risk group though ever fail
at a hundred percent so that's a
decision that they can make and
whether they want to use that
PSA the same with the funds I
always tell them it was not
mentor to sign to drive it
detention hearing it was then
decided to designed to help set
conditions of release for the
defendant if they are to be
released and that is what we
message that is what we teach.
Throughout the state.
And and it sounds like I mean
that that would certainly be
that the country we want to have
happening I guess how do you
know if it's working yeah and
and I with all due respect to Mr
bara and he's saying absolutely
no judge ever just looked at
this number and goes based off
on that hi I find that that
difficult to believe
how.
How how do you know your
training is is being effective
so chair Senator we look at data
so we look at the rate in with
how many PSAs were completed in
a certain jurisdiction it right
right in that jurisdiction was
supervision recommended by the
PSA and at what rate was
supervision ordered within going
and we look at the each risk
group so obviously focuses for
PML for on the public safety
assessment supervision is going
to be ordered within going we
look to see at what rate was pre
trial supervision ordered for
PML fours and threes and twos
and one's and so we're
constantly looking at that data
to identify.
Are the judges understanding
with the public safety
assessment is doing or the
understanding when they have a
supervision program that can
help support pre trial success
and then we look at the data of
folks were ordered to
supervision versus people who
are not ordered supervision and
our data shows that people who
are PML threes forced to choose
day performing a much higher
rate than those who do not
receive the supervision and so
we're constantly bringing this
data back to our jurisdictions
almost every month as the data
is getting bigger the data sets
are getting bigger and we're
able to show the more so we can
have those discussions so we
have a jurisdiction where we
notice that
Only fifty percent of the folks
who scorpion for Irving in order
to supervision the first thing
we put together is the outcomes
for the supervised and
unsupervised population to show
the judges defendants they're
coming before you are going to
make their court hearings and
not pick up new charges at a
higher rate if you utilize your
pre trial program so that's how
we're constantly bringing data
back to these jurisdictions.
Mr chair and I have other
questions written down here
making fun right now will come
back around to we have the time
I announce the committee will
conclude tonight at five o'clock
so we have little bit more in
our I have on the list the
center Baca center world center
Moores and all have some
questions as well Senator Ivy
Soto of recognize you before
I'll go so with with that and
I'm gonna recognize each members
of us to try and maintain
yourself about ten minutes
before you watch the clock I
will also always ask about this
the session that members really
control the time the your
allocated so if you want to
precise answer and demand that
in and move on to the gonna
really up to you to to control
the ebb and flow of oil to
questions and answers of
survivor you're listening and
senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this committee
together.
To educate us on some of the
stuff this isn't my area of
practicing so online fairly high
this sort of thing
Mr Chairman question is that
sounded interesting
When you continually have have
stated Mr chair that of this is
not the tension determination
to.
Is that correct this tells you
does not tell you at all whether
container formerly somebody is
that correct Mr.
That is correct the PSA is not
designed or intended or used to
identify who should be detained
who should be released because
of Mr chair during during this
and the example was brought
forth by by a member of that.
This is this tool seemed or
seems to recommend in the
instance of the recent shootings
in Albuquerque the release of
that individual.
are are you saying that
otherwise it didn't.
In the.
Point towards releasing that
that individual and then the
judges on the termination
decided to detain him.
Mr chair Senator Baca.
Mr Morrison.
The instrumentalists backwards
at the person's history they
look at Mr ping's history and
said he would be appropriate for
this level supervision if you're
going to replace it doesn't say
release a cause for for exactly
the reasons that drive Baca let
me drive sorry that was talking
about that is the PSA doesn't
know that this person is
escalated in their behavior
doesn't know that they
participated in the last he
doesn't know that they have
expressed continued animosity
toward elected officials does
not in the in those he had prior
convictions the service time he
never missed a appropriations he
behaved there after it's really
rated relatively low on the
scale has nothing to do with
whether he should be detained
because that's why we did it
that's why you in the
constitutional amendment you
sent to the people and that they
adopted again the district
attorney the responsibility for
determining.
Who should be eligible for
detention and then having to
prove.
If we release them the threat to
public safety or to a person
the PSA does not do that and
it's a mistake as I said at the
beginning Senator put the were
detained in those boxes they
don't belong there and I'm glad
we've learned a lot in the last
six years so it'll we can take
it off.
Thank you Mr chair and the of
just to clarify it wasn't me I
was a part of this legislature
at the time that was sent to the
public and for the record I
voted against that amendment as
a public citizen citizen but
What what I'm reading here
though and and from what you
tell me that there are bye bye
bye bye this tool put it
constructs at the end when it
gives its analysis if you will
once we input the information Mr
chair is that there could be
conditions of release for.
Any crime regardless how heinous
it is
we could have the most heinous
crime we could imagine and the
this PSA tool will will say if
you decide to release them you
can release them here's what.
Here's what we put forward
Mister chairman Senator Baca
that person would get a PSA
score but of course I hope the
price could ring motion and
prove we should let him out
because he's too dangerous.
So ultimately it's left to the
prosecutor.
The judge is no option to detain
the defendant unless the
prosecutor brings emotion
improves there too dangerous to
release that is correct and so
reading Mr chair there on page
four at the bottom where it
gives this this example of of
PSA score in here it says
According to this metric
corresponds to recommendation of
detention if the judge finds
that the conditions in the New
Mexico constitution apply
otherwise release with maximum
conditions of pretrial
supervision okay so I guess
that's what we just covered the
next is other other counties in
New Mexico do not include this
category and only recommend
conditions of release
why would one county be
different than another why would
you if this is such a uniform
tool aid for staff why we use it
one way in one place and another
way in another area.
Mister chairman Senator Baca
because we're using it correctly
in every other county and we
allowed it to be used to be
recommending a detention in this
case back in twenty seventeen
which is our first
implementation and that was that
was it was wrong to do so it
doesn't and so so Mister chair
this is a this example you gave
us that is not in use right now
yes it is in your we have to
work with the folks who
Bernalillo county to change it.
Because it causes no end of
grief that is it's not
appropriate and I'm not you know
I'm not trying to point the
finger directly you Mr chair but
we haven't acknowledgment here
that the we have a pool here's
what it does Mr chair
but were knowingly using getting
correctly in our largest
district in the state Mister
chairman Senator Baca
I think that's a fair at the
fair come yes it will fix.
But if if it's recommending
detention you would think that
would only favor detention that
would make you more likely
contain more defendants thank.
That's all I have Mister.
Thank you Senator Wirth.
thank you Mr chairman.
Again let me say I appreciate
very much the chance to dig into
this I also appreciate the Chief
Justice kind of re framing of
where we are reminding everyone
why this did pass and the
benefits of the system that we
have before this we couldn't
locking of dangerous defendants
were basically bailout were out
on the street this given that
the DA an option to hold those
individuals.
I'm having trouble though the
same thing Senator Baca wasn't
again I'm like Senator Baca he
and I don't practice in this
area so I'm not a criminal
lawyer but I just I wrote down a
quote already when you said the
tension is a different issue and
again I think it's been pointed
out that we've clearly got a.
Issue and Bernalillo county with
a form that.
I can only imagine if I was
sitting there as the judge.
You know when that language is
on there about yes this got some
detention and and look let's
let's let's that we have a lot
of discussion which we have here
you know there's a lot of the
judiciary a lot of we're dealing
with a pay increase bill for for
the reasons which I attract you
know more folks we've got more
experience that we have a lot of
younger lawyers that are going
on the bench and and I can only
imagine how challenging this is
to try to implement so.
I want to my question I guess as
follows the funds to make.
I'm having trouble.
With a presentation is been
given about what we do now and
looking at what New Jersey to us
because when I'm looking what
I'm looking at the sheet that we
have your free trial.
The first thing I see here is
that this is pre trial or
release and detention
recommendations on number one
this is this is this is totally
different than what you're
saying far pool stuff like for
in that.
Yes the New Jersey also I
believe and we do have folks
from advancing pre trial policy
research available to answer
this question they.
Senator PSE and they also do
implementation across this
country are very familiar with
New Jersey as well they
implemented about the same time
a little bit earlier than we
didn't really know County and so
they adopted early on the PSA
did have some decision making
frameworks that had to detention
in the since them the public
safety assessment is being
implemented without the language
of detention across the country
and so I don't know if you'd
like to hear from them we have
met all stuff who's available to
answer that question
specifically and why there you
would see that difference on the
public safety assessment he's
available visit.
How legislation given the time I
just wanna make sure I
understand what you're saying
because of the the says this was
just recently revised to go this
direction let me just let me
just if I'm seeing here the
first determination is whether
of the person charged has
committed a crime that is
subject to a forum for
presumption of detention
pursuant to statute.
And so I I guess I'm.
Yelp that is a presumption I
sentence asking about that but
which to me like that the
legislature there is actually.
Well whole list of crimes in
there and they are saying when
that's made in effect the judges
being given a clear signal.
You're gonna have to go and find
some reason not to detain them
under that scenario so so this
looks like a tool it's very
different than what what we're
doing and I just wanted to
clarify that piece of this
question maybe Mr Garrett is in
the back I know over the years
question for you because I know
you did the research and I
thought it was very interesting
here the importance of regular
validation I just can you remind
us that we was that something
that we have the sensing
Commission do is a study with
where where did that come from
and how many times in the seven
years that this tools venues
have we validated our tool.
And Senator we about the
individual this one time it
takes awhile for pilots to have
a large is actually analyzed for
the purposes and we have
analyzed it what we do know
right we do know that as the
course increase
there is increased in the pool
actually projects that we see it
so you can see it on the face
when you see the graphics
conceded and then validation
studies using more sophisticated
analytics.
And Mr chair just to confirm I
think you it was stated that
your validation a year ago.
Do I fair and saying that you
did not find reasons to alter
the tool based on the analysis
that you did.
We don't find reasons right now
for you to including on center
and on.
After the validated the
I studied.
Well Mr chairman I do think the
the importance of validation
especially as the data continues
to come out is a really good
recommendations and and I don't
know whether that's something
the court put in place but we're
in a situation where we've got
resources and it just seems to
me that we need to make sure
that that type of validation is
happening and we're learning
from the results of the tool as
it's being used more more you
know the final thing I say no
Representative Hochman Vigil is
here of when I met with the
chief justice she's caring
available leave for judicial
education
and we actually had a discussion
will remind where the hell was
with me chief of staff was
longtime lawyer who actually
suggested let's put some more
money in for regular training
for we were talking about judges
but it sounds like people system
and so in terms of doing pre
trial using this tool I mean the
fact that you were able to
travel with seventy.
Folks to get the best training
possible that seems to me to be
something that hasn't happened
and so I just think this is a
thing where as that bill goes
through if we talk about that
this.
Criminal justice bill during the
session I really think we need
to put in a recurring dollars so
that that is built in as new
judges come on quite frankly as
the tool involves the process of
all of that training is there so
that's what I have Mister
chairman and thank you for thank
you for.
Sure absolutely we have.
Schools other proposed budget
that would look at
right received which includes
revivals of.
Representative lose the
possession Grandjean use of our
and this tool is more likely
that the estate were actively
produce value than these other
now is more predictive than any
other method yes we can use
these very large actually yes
other thing so for example if
you were to consider some of
these compliance with the.
We have data that.
But.
Us and the food.
Part of
the policy is you know what
this.
You can pull up.
And you can.
And if the latter.
More for so yeah after of these
people also incision SB what's
your part is going through this
risky one thing if you're not
willing to take a risk older.
It also.
In this environment seven point
out.
Which is pretty important here
folks thank you but I understand
that the vast majority of people
do drugs are not.
If we look at all of us.
We look at the portion of those
are Masser committed crimes are
committed for people arrested.
The first
graph is.
The test was small to table
Representative the focus is not
on pre trial detention the focus
has.
One of those people who are
highly.
You have some sense of they are
not free trial.
This is very very small.
What was.
So much just one final thing I
mean I think the question Mr
here and just because these
proposals come through and we're
hearing them I really like to
hear from you to the extent that
were able to.
Have that data set I don't know
how long it takes to do the
actual shaping but you know to
understand okay here's a
proposal that's being pitched
for.
A whole string of reasons what
is the data say I mean I just
think that's the key to this
thing what are the data saying I
mean are we is that something
that that you're able to help us
with past as these come through
to understand what the data
looks like.
Chair of Senator Wirth right
more I wanted we refer you a
little bit the that that to
Senator duties question is it
working.
A very real sense it is not
working because we're losing the
public's trust.
For those of us who are
interested in different
treatment and doing things that
are alternatives to our current.
With the moviemakers individuals
and if we don't public's trust
in New Mexico we have the we're
gonna lose criminal reform
program so the public trust
matters and and I think that's
why the New Jersey framework
speaks to the public's trust in
a way that makes sense were you
do not have to recommendations
coming out that are contrary to.
Well Mister chair I think what's
really important is that all the
participants in the system are
part of the discussion and and
are working to ensure that the
data is not being used for a
variety of different reasons and
different directions I I'm just
concerned that to some extent I
I hear things and I see the data
and it doesn't match and that
concerns me because you're right
I think that there's been a lot
of information out there and and
we're hearing different
presentations right here in
terms of how things are being
interpreted so I mean part of
what we've done and I think and
I really appreciate the
opportunity to kind of have a
discussion you know we're
outside of election season and
that helps I will tell you and
then let's just be honest about
this Lara messaging going on for
political reasons and so let's
let's talk about the data let's
look at the data and let's let's
work together to kind of rebuild
the public trust because I
couldn't agree with you more and
and the worst thing we can do is
to lose the resources to kind of
focus on the front you know and
the the behavioral health and
substance abuse all of the
fundamental underlying issues
that are driving so much of this
so Mr chair Senator words and
phrases let's hear the news
from multiple parties that is
that sucks I have a common place
so that we can analyze rising
percent last year I I don't know
if you can I'm not an expert on
the data but all I know is that.
We should be working from the
same kind of data there's no
question about that we have
different data seeing use in
different ways that's what
creates the confusion and you're
saying amongst us up here.
That's what I have to thank you
thank you Sir were there Morris
men services thank you Mr sorry
had to step up to me with some.
Built on for Monday
get out of our center Baca and
also our appreciate this
gentleman you promise
informative hearing and it
definitely has been a former
star thank you for that one of
my frustrations and Weston has
been
As a one of the two non lawyers
up on this podium along Senator
Stewart I think would bring a
different perspective sometimes
better sometimes worse since
we're not lawyers
and see and but I do know is our
constituents and Bernalillo
county are incredibly frustrated
and the crime guess it's worse
and worse and worse
hundred twenty odd in order to
spend every single one of the
staff it's it's it's hard to
really.
Your science understanding like
you are because we're dealing
with human people and murders
and and the families of the
wife's destroyed and I think
that our constituents are.
Frustrated as well so I'm
frustrated about what's going
because you can't tell me the
system's working right now to
cut time time again the system's
working you can't be working one
hundred twenty five people
killed in Burlington county can
be working when we introduce our
political talking points senator
Wirth this this is truth it's
different up here it's different
Los crucis and and and and it is
from the county it's it's it's
getting back to worsen
Bernalillo county in Albuquerque
and others a lot of different
dynamics with.
There's certain parts some of
one of the biggest guys around
and there's parts are program go
to anymore.
And it says what it says a lot
So I don't know where my
frustration is with Mr chair
really appreciate this one of
things I notice on the the tool
that you're going through as
we're going through this it
didn't say anything about who
you hang out with that and maybe
I'm wrong does it are gang and I
don't know if this is the two
previous questions chairs to the
collective does it does it
actually look at game membership
who also going to be in the
house if you're released things
like that this tool told the
judge who you're gonna be
hanging out with.
So chair Senator the tool it
does and I think I believe it
was Mr job and I'm very for that
kind of talked about the pool
when it looks at what it doesn't
look at think Chris is yes about
it's very general the tool does
not take into effect every just
type of scenario possible that
you could see in those that we
probably couldn't even think of
so the tool doesn't do that in
house it's nine factors
primarily based on criminal
history based off what types of
criminal history you have if you
fail to appear in age but the
judge does take into effect and
looks at not only the charge but
the circumstances of that charge
they have the criminal complaint
available to them they get
information from the prosecutor
they get information from the
public defender of the defense
attorney and that's where the
aggravating and mitigating type
circumstances is presented to
the judge there's no way that
any tool to take into account
for every type of scenario
possible and again I mean if you
really want to get behind the
mechanics of the science of how
the tool was created to identify
these nine factors of their most
predictive of course parents of
public safety.
Folks who can provide that to
you so that's kind of the short
answer to that.
Thank Mister thank you
So the the game membership for
that isn't considered one of the
nine factors are the judges us
is that something part of the
they're they're asking.
I am a particular thing you know
we we have that should update
the broad daylight were the area
nation which shooting up each
other
do you know one of the many many
I think we're all becoming numb
to it and all over what with the
judge been known those
affiliations.
Senator Wirth.
If the district attorney brought
forward that information to us
and I would think surprising if
they did not either when they're
talking about conditions of
release of paid don't determine
that's an appropriate place for
detention motion they would
certainly bring forward that
kind of information please
officer come back gang
affiliation to increase the
level of supervision of
individual we're talking about
people hang out with known
criminals and violence actors.
I would think that would be
something that.
Forward in a detention motion
because the DA wants to say.
This person has the means and
the motivation to commit more
crimes if you let him out and
that's going danger people
because again engage in a shoot
out on a public street.
Please put in detention but I
do.
The tool doesn't have that
information but the judge really
should have a list of things I
was referring to in real for a
one includes all of that the
judge can consider all of that
and whatever the prosecutor
wants to bring forward to show
either.
What conditions we should put
the person under if they're
least or.
In a detention question why they
shipped.
Mr to.
I wonder have to offer thank you
thank you for that you know
thing when we're looking at the
pool and the recidivism rate
that Mr Moore without a mass was
talking about
with some of the stats but we
all know that there's a large
percentage of Corona RT reported
and you know I have some staff
pull up some just some stats
twenty percent of our not not
least twenty percent or not
report on how you come up with
that staff it's gonna sounds
from low to me forty six percent
of cases are not clear it's at
some all right most of us are
muted at me this is is a staff
members I have new I think that
that is accurate yes.
Mr chairman and senator Morris.
The court can only deal with
people who get arrested and then
the the release the more the
table depending on how things go
what we can tell you is that of
those who got released in
Bernalillo.
That is really is an important
point.
Wurster there.
Committing based on the re
arrest rate a very small
percentage of crime crime is
increased violent crimes
increased this is a national
trend.
But it's not the people that the
judge let out who are.
Being arrested for.
The current very few Mr sorry I
I appreciate that.
But when they're out of me with
so much crime happening we don't
know if the committee crimes or
second costs when they're out
there is might be more careful
when around we don't know that
and it's arguably with the level
of crime in Albuquerque that my
decisions are facing this opted
not K. but you're right we don't
know we just don't know how we
will agree to that and Mr chair
for right looks like the GHGs
former AG's policy I was one of
six Mr chair Senator Moores
would say that there's a major
issue with some of the data
from.
Dr care and and the data that I
fear of our what we were
focusing on those individuals
who there was an attempt to
detained and released and that
population.
Come back when it.
Twenty five Mr when I and that's
a lot of blackrock those are
known as.
No interest so it doesn't get to
what your W. two seven.
Mr chair Senator Moores.
They're not being arrested by
and large for the fire crews are
driving your community to have
its concerts property crime yes
and I understand your program is
concerned but they may not have
been detained for any number of
reasons not the least of which
is.
If you watch the detention
motion hearings that are
conducted Bernalillo county you
might be extremely disappointed
at the level of evidence
provided that tries to justify
the detention and if the judge
doesn't have the information
necessary and this could be
brought before the judge came
through anything this is the
rules of evidence don't apply.
But the judge has to make a
decision based on what was
presented in the court thanks.
I would discourage anybody but I
am telling you.
I just can't granted to tension
motion requests the prosecution
presents evidence that meets the
state.
Mr chair and senator Chris more
would like to talk about some I
did a point.
Earlier future time Sir Senator
which quickly Mr stern more
think about us.
Probably related so
good
morning passage of the vote
because.
We agree with the.
this legislative I don't want to
get into the raiders and
underwriters but the point that
all.
Is that if you look at the total
number of felony charges that
are have been filed in
Albuquerque.
This small fraction of those
were filed against people who
are currently under pretrial
supervision.
And depending on what you count
you know it's like two or three
percent.
So that's a different so that
that's all that that's not the
same as how many of the people
who are released get rearrested
it's how much of the crime and
the whole community is being
committed by those who are
currently in pre trial projects.
you Senator chair I think the
AG's office might disagree with
you from look on his face so I
appreciate that and I do I know
we're we're for real or type of
time and I appreciate that so
Slevin educational for FY ago I
was fortunate to be one of only
two people not to go for certain
constitutional amendment does
pose a couple years ago and it's
our legislature
Mr chair
part of anyone for that matter I
member which is referenced Mr
chair of rules and though I know
you look for for you to sponsor
I was just always speak to share
speaking to the chair I was
referred to someone to your to
your right.
intent on.
Well I apologize I apologize Mr
chairman to maybe three people
and for
I'm sorry got distracted with
that
With the the laser beam coming
to me from just a few seats over
here
Zero to emit light because this
is such a on a poor conversation
and hard conversation but we
change in a in a month and on
the Senator Wirth on I'm I'm
just teasing you know but it was
important we changed presumption
of in it presumption in that dog
Billy beforehand of the
constitution would have a
certain level presumption maybe
senator Wirth right correct or
do we not basically what my
question is what is changing
that to a presumption to clear
that was clear and convincing
evidence what kind of impact
that have on what we're talking
about Mr chair RT or anyone.
Mr chair and senator Morris.
For that there was no standard
because you couldn't ask a judge
to detain someone with the even
if you could prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that they were
dangerous dangers to the public
or dangers to evict you could
not order them to detention.
Only the constitutional
amendment is a that that's only
place it just got the authority
to say you so dangerous we're
going to okay and I thought I
would submit the constitutional
law would require a standard
like clear convincing evidence
to deprive someone of liberty
before the contract we don't
publish before we convict but
that's the standard that was
adopted because usually for that
there was no standard because
there was no detention.
I just really don't punish
before we convict as we do at
all times or you look at how the
the government goes out special
the federal government will go
out to people and try to
bankrupt them and defending
themselves so for everything
else that's a that's another
issue as we talk about.
but it's just part of
frustration I you know I really
appreciate countered was at the
AG's office for this purpose
thanks and this is a small
sample size and for for
individuals
We're talking about all these
other murders and I look at
these for.
And the two that were granted
that emotions it we're granted
were of them it's easy to say
that there were added because
Amanda and International
national news this is what the
people the country we're knowing
this after we had this the staff
against the Muslim community the
tech and selective Fishel's this
is all over the news on national
school these infants and.
And the judge to our
conversation before you made the
right decision because the world
is watching
keeping them in and I feel for
the families of the other two on
the sheet who didn't have the
world watching who were released
and it's hard to not just assume
in this very small sample size
but just because you had a
hundred twelve legislators
watching you pissed off.
At this kind of shooting our
colleagues houses in this other
guy who was killing Muslims and
we all thought it was a hate
crime was a crime ended up being
There were granted but the other
people who are facing crime were
granted and that's what makes a
lot of frustration is with the
constituents I have what's going
on in our system because it's
it's hard to say it's working in
my work in these two high
profile cases but for the
average brit crime it's not
working.
I guess that Mr us more upon
publication myself the question
I'm happy to once.
Sure this has been a very
informative.
All the pause for a moment to
tease overview of issue come
back to the.
Will your three bills Monday but
we will also on Monday address
the constitutionality
presumptions.
The issues mentioned
conversation.
The the.
For ever so thank you very much
up Mr chairman and and up.
so this so this several others
identified.
Those people who are not lawyers
or lawyers who do not practice
in the program.
I am the only member this panel
who has been of.
prosecutor and who's up in
advance for.
and and so in fact Mr bar and I
first got to know each other
when we were both assisted dust.
in the committee's office and so
you know this is.
this is a there's a world that
are very familiar.
And you know.
How this world works before.
The the way this will work
before was
you'd go to the to the first
appearance of the DA's office
almost never showed up pre trial
services would appear with the
rap sheet of on somebody they
would go down the list on on
that but the judge and they
would make a recommendation and
the recommendations candidly
often very based on gender a
very often very based on a
person's ethnicity or race
they did not always take into
account somebody's H. and in
fact I can remember
looking at several cases where
you have people who have eight
nine ten twelve.
Previous cases.
And not a single failure to
appear.
This is someone who's actually a
very.
Low risk in terms of
participating in the process.
Cause dangerous this was not
part of the question.
And it was for you to
participate in the process.
And yet that was often not
properly analyzed in the way
that we're doing it so you know
here we have.
We have a pool.
That
provides objective information.
If the.
The judges.
Or to be always following this
will there be no need for judge.
If the judges were never to be
follow this pool that right
noted for pool.
The tool should properly be used
to educate.
The judge.
And given the judge so
consideration.
About about what the case is
that I will note interestingly.
On the examples that we were
given up by Mr Mendez
where he compared Mr
Pena I believe to Mr that a.
Mr that up was represented at
that stationary bike mystery
bada.
who is sitting here and
who successfully argued that
there should be no pre trial
detention.
But I will also note that
something that would not be
picked up in this pool but that
I think was probably significant
and I don't know the details of
Mr that is K..
Is that Mr penny up lost an
election to
To Representative.
Yes.
but for some reason chose to
hire people to them.
shoot at the homes.
Not Mr Garcia.
But other people who are not
related to that election.
Now that that person incredibly
dangerous in our society.
Because there's no rhyme or
reason as to.
Who he jokes we can discern.
It's possible.
Without million out and I won't
bother us Mr about a two to
expand upon at that Mr that up.
Was presented somebody and shot
house the person who was present
at.
That would make it incredibly
less dangerous to the rest of
the general public.
That that individual home might
want to go on vacation for a
while but the rest of us are
fine he's not a danger to us.
And that's something that the
tool will pick up.
But that is an important part of
the judicial analysis when
deciding whether or not to grant
release we're not Christmas.
So I don't think it's simply a
matter of was in the news or not
in the news I think it's a it's
question what was the nature of
the shootings and and is there
any nexus between his anger and
who was getting shot up.
The.
I will say Mr economic.
And and as possible that Mr
there may have this information.
Up I don't know but the part of
the lore out there.
Is that people get arrested the
first time okay the schools for
low on our tool.
They at least and then they get
picked up for another crime and
then they get released so they
get picked up or not I think it
released does the data show that
that is the case.
Because I think that's really
what we're talking about there's
a small percentage of people
committing the bulk of the
crimes.
Is that of course I mean it
makes sense that the first one
or two times.
So the first time they're
they're likely going to score
low.
What are we there are are the
judges than granting the motions
when people come back to the
system having violated those
conditions.
Mr chairman Senator I don't
believe we have the exact that
you talk but I will tell you.
If you are rested for another
crime no matter what happened
the first time.
You can be revoked because you
violated a condition of release
which was don't commit another
crime right you don't have to
meet the standard that applies
initially on detention.
If there's a detention motion.
Get released in thank you that
the persistent RDD get released
you get arrested for another
crime.
You can bring your for three
motion to bring a new detention
for three or four three in state
okay judge you came a fair shot
he doesn't care so we need to
protect ourselves even more than
we did last time we were here
and you didn't think.
We can.
That we I'm sure we can figure
out that that or Mr Kirk Dr
grant can find do it somebody
will say I appreciate it that's
why we gave the institute for
Social Research all of the case
status at Houston prior bundle
please answer questions is it
working is it biased and all
that we don't.
We don't that our cells often
because we want to make sure
object identified as is working
or not working so maybe after
can or has it that he could tell
you.
chairman Senator I think we have
the.
You've already answered probably
could okay it is an interesting
one I think we were answered we
can take that note and I can see
we.
Absolutely back on Monday the
budget.
Legislative.
and I was chairman of this
revenue I I do appreciate given
your voice that you're powering
through this hearing up before
we leave if you just do us a
favor of saying I'd like to make
an offer you can't refuse.
I can use to you it doesn't hurt
it's just sounds.
You know I I
I will say and I'm not that I'm
sorry that that a couple of our
colleagues.
are proximate by Jeffrey in this
committee to Senator Wirth I
have left the the room at the
moment I will say that as I'm
looking at the and what they do
in New Jersey which is actually
a very different models it
that's not a model that educates
the judge that is a model that
seeks to make a decision for the
judge that creates press a
rebuttable presumption but one
of the judges to get over that
right is that is that you know
for example if you look at step
two.
That is.
The final recommendation is no
release right you don't need a
double.
So the third one there is a
draft.
We had a couple years ago that
would have taken.
What is currently Mr leader
a prostitution.
It would have reclassify that is
felony human trafficking.
Right so those people would be.
What is right now.
Most of them a fine what is
right now for this to be there
those people would be mandatory.
Keep in check.
Up.
Right we need to be aware of
what happens when you they've
the prop.
I I noticed up three certain
persons not have weapons.
Up.
Please also stop the car there's
three people in the car.
Driver of the car has a as per
phone.
First of the vaccine has a gun
on the positions of the person.
There are police officers who
will charge the driver with
possession of a firearm because
it was in the same vehicle.
Even though it wasn't in the
vehicle it was on the person of
someone who's in the vehicle and
not even in the same room.
So when you go based on the
charge.
That's something we I think.
Should be up so that we reject.
because I don't think that gives
us the proper education.
Out.
The safety of that individual in
the community.
Up and up nor the flight risk of
that individual.
In the community I will not
going back to my previous
question Mr Chapman about the
The people who were sort of a.
Is that
and and and he accurately state
but you know for the motion let
us translate that right.
Is the conditions are really
spoke.
If fact that motion does not
require for.
That the prosecutor bring the
motion.
That can be done source funded
by the judge.
Because you violated the judge's
order.
So the judges if somebody is out
on conditions of release and
picks up what are the terms that
are up to wait for the dust to
make the motion.
And in fact I think that is one
of the issues that I think a lot
of us have been frustrated
about.
Is that is that I think the
judges could be more proactive.
With people who are committing
new crimes.
While they're out of conditions
of release.
However.
The language in the Custer's men
which Senator Wirth carried.
In which I spent a fair amount
of time with the latest Justice
Daniels.
Crafting the language.
Up the the requirement that it
be a motion of the prosecutor
was something that I was very
very strongly about was very
passionate about.
Because because for someone if
someone's already in the system.
You've offended the judge.
What what is new in the system.
The judge should not be the
prosecutor the judge should be
the umpire.
The prosecutor has the job to do
that.
And and and you know Mr Mendis I
am curious you you had a.
You had a slide.
That was detention decisions by
crime.
And homicide was very high.
And
ivory was very low John was very
low.
which I find on the face of a
disturbing.
But I'm also curious what was
the.
What was the risk score.
For those people when the DA's
office chose to bring.
The the discretionary motion to
to take.
On a on a on a fellow on the
side the risk score by
definition is gonna be very
high.
Mr up I get this early but but
but more often than I probably.
And and on on a child abuse
depending on the nature of the
child abuse.
That goes into the into the
arguments side of it.
Office of the to to discuss but
then again that might but I am
curious about.
and actually would ask that you
provide that to us.
Separately so that we can have
that information but go ahead if
you prefer the Mr chair Senator
Ivy Soto so I indicated on the
slide that for those child abuse
cases the average new criminal
activity score for all those
with the three so just smack dab
in the in the middle of the of
the arm tool so those all those
child abuse cases on average the
score three.
For your I appreciate that and
and I guess the.
You know you up and I'm sorry
ma'am I don't Mr thank you
Representative or.
You made the point that no risk
group is Representative.
Let's also be clear no risk of
the zero percent.
No restrict is here
Representative.
I was assigned by the court
years ago representing in the
queues of up sex right.
And when I was having him
evaluated a has H. argued
against a.
But the one of the things that
the that the expert witness that
I was working with explain to me
is that.
None of us are zero.
The M. and so that's the other
thing that we all need to
remember on these risk scores is
all of us are somewhere in
there.
Along that belong to us.
And and so the question is what
is the what's.
What is the data helps out with
because we're not going to hold
them.
and so
Representative and I will the
last I'm gonna say is.
Is that to the extent that we
want to have in in the
legislation.
Recalibration of the pool.
at least we have the evidence
based.
So that we're not doing and
outcome oriented recalibration
of an objective what's what's
being object.
and and so that's just something
that you know.
It does concern me that the
recalibration the tool could
lead us down a lot of the Jersey
path.
Of a predetermined in certain
things.
but instead to to use the data.
And follow that data in terms of
regulation.
So with that Mr chairman thank
you very much appreciate the
time and I thank you all of you
for your presentations that you
might.
Thank you other members anything
more.
I do I want to share that thanks
to all of you who came and
We're here today I want to
particularly thank
representative today hoping
the hill for serving her duties
in the house and over here in
the upper chamber where the
Senate services delivered.
Body roll in the.
It's a privilege to have you
here so thank you for that thank
you all for for being here as
well to.
Mr Mendis I I had the most
compelling point of my afternoon
which is the the the risk here
is losing public confidence.
I would probably go beyond that
state that ship has sailed we've
lost the public confidence when
it comes to the criminal justice
system the that's certainly true
in Albuquerque.
Aware of for probably the last
ten years that I've had children
living there in college there
the young people refer to the
city as Goff.
and and make the analogy sensing
some young people know it is not
in there has affirmatively they
know what I'm talking about.
Albuquerque's analogize to.
Thank tional Batman movies were.
The criminals run the city.
and I know that's maybe not
reality but that certainly the
public perception.
In I think that desperate times
call for desperate measures.
I don't need to tell this
committee or anybody audience
Albuquerque's highest number
right the country actually not
first secretary.
This is not the time for.
I think I can say this I never
know what I can say any more as
my dad use use word **** footing
around I don't know where that
still allowed or not so it's not
hi
Yeah I apologize if that's not.
any longer acceptable term but
but that's the way I feel that
so often times we're doing we're
we're we're we're we're.
Tinkering around the edges and
not realizing we have a very
serious problem and and.
I'm not yet sure after today
that we've made too much
progress except that we've I
think we've identified a couple
things to me one is that this
hearing and and these issues
should identify and highlight
the importance of the judiciary
in our society the importance in
rural we put in their courage
and their experience and their
capabilities and we're working
very hard in the Senate of
starting even this week to
assure that we have the best
possible people we can on the
bench.
The the point that I made last
week but made again repeatedly
since that is the judges in the
Pena case of exercise their
discretion without the need of
presumptions.
And and despite everything I've
heard here today I still not
heard any good argument.
For the need to presume guilt to
detain somebody faxed to really
to Mr Moore's point earlier I
heard really the opposite which
is painting everyone with a
broad brush.
It is injustice and even using a
tool that attempts to paint a
broad brush this is really an
injustice as well too so.
What will cover that it's
somewhat again on Monday.
I hope that that will talk a
great deal more about the
validation of this tool the my
understanding is the tools been
implemented Mr pep and how long.
Mr chair anywhere anywhere in
the state of New Mexico twenty
seventeen in Albuquerque twenty
nineteen other places as well.
So so twenty seventeen six years
I think I heard Mr Boller
describing best practices to be
an analysis or evaluation every
year every two years my
understanding is we or maybe
three years we've done it once
in six or seven years and we did
it last year.
But then can't.
I would choose to renew
community your first validation
you have to you can't do it in
three years because not enough
people have.
And subject to the PSA.
And finish their got released
and finish their case so there's
a delay when you first do it
because you just don't have
enough that I'm Dr Stewart so we
had to wait to we had at least
enough data to make the.
Mathematical analysis.
Well and and I trust which is a
misstep is the reason the
validation is was not conducted
in the first six years because
the inadequacy of data I hope
that's the case I hope that the
reason that the validation was
not that this is
frankly a lack of diligence to
to that to that issue because
we're gonna have to be diligent
about this and and that type of
analysis even when I heard the
validation that was done last
year my understanding from again
all welcome back to spend more
time with you rather committee
but the validation I was room
was it was validated for gender
and race.
Whether to very narrow issues to
me you're saying no Turner was
much broader was founded for
predictive ability on NCAA that
FTA and race and gender you two
kinds of validation does it to
do what it's supposed to be
doing is it helpful there's a
predictive and is it biased
because a lot of these tools in
trying to be biased especially
if they rely on arrests that are
which are still some but I would
like to hear what's when you've
missed Revenue said they're
valid for NCA criminal activity
the right wrist rest of
violence.
Okay the risk of re rest in the
risk of failing to yield the two
things the tools designed to
make.
I'm always in your office and
and and I appreciate your always
been open to those discussions
I'm always a little cautious
about what I consider to be may
be unfairly but I consider to be
spent so when we say well the
tools very predictive that
people don't go back and re
offend for violent crime while
the crime in a very specific
small category so when I hear
well the the tools back to
within four five percent for
individuals who were released
and and only four or five
percent of those people go on to
commit violent crime and that's
a narrow category of very
specific narrow category of
crimes that doesn't mean that
those individuals are not a much
higher rate committing crimes
to re write a few years any
arrest right.
It I may well.
Chairman I apologize but the
state is leading to the twenty
one okay a year and a half.
And it does take into account
all sorts of new from what and
we're want to know is that
oftentimes in New Mexico
activity is less serious than
the crime for which they were
originally charges source so
workforce.
The New Jersey even violent
activity is frequently
misdemeanors and occasionally.
Because circles all for your.
Active in the office I miss and
thank you for that but I'm gonna
tell you to the people we
represent I don't think that
matters of I I don't think that
it Matt I don't think that
matters that the crimes are less
when the when we release them
and they go back to create
creating a commitment crimes I
don't think that's much
consolation public that the
crimes the release and commit
are not as offensive as the
first crime that they're ready
for that maybe some consolation
to some but I gotta tell you I I
think it's very little
consolation to the people I hi
Representative they don't want
people committing crimes and and
I don't think it's much of an
excuse to say well the crimes
are committing or not as bad as
the crime they were arrested for
the first time we released a
for.
Two respecting but I hope you
understand that that that we're
we're press looking at it from
the standpoint of people we
represent in the in the and the
public perception that one of
the most important I think a
point that was made for me today
is that.
That even when it gets to the
criminal justice system that
percentage is so small of the
experience of crime that that
was very powerful for me there's
a hundred crimes we may only be
initially attacking forty
percent of those that get around
to a charge of arrests and only
of those the provincially get
through the system in the end
you're you're by applying
percentage point percentage
you're getting to ten percent
fifteen percent of the crimes
that are being committed in our
society are actually ever
getting our attention and any
kind of response in and so
that's part of why I believe
that the the public perception
of Gotham or whatever you want
to call it the crime is a very
serious problem we can we can
minimize with the cases that we
actually see respond to but but
public perception is going to be
one of being unsafe.
Of some concern the I'm I don't
know whether you're confirm this
perhaps I think it's you Mr
Mendez
as an exercise we took the Pena
case and ran it through the New
Jersey pool that right you're
not in your head affirmatively.
And we're gonna have to resolve
this gets it some other time we
have more time I'm still leaving
this committee hearing by being
told that the article does not
make recommendations for release
or detention and yet I'm looking
at the report which says
recommendation released
recommendation release hi I'm
gonna have to get educated why
I'm being told that's not with
the tool does when I am reading
it
I couldn't help but hear that
but part of presentation that.
One of the national politicians
I think a year to go with one of
state you can't believe what
you're reading and you shouldn't
believe what you see because
that's not reality and I.
I'm inclined to to read what I
read and see when it makes a
recommendation are aware that
the judge is going to perhaps
understand that's what that is a
unless you are trained to not.
I see that as a recommendation
for for what I'm reading.
But we'll talk more I think it's
I think it's been a good
opportunity for our committee
and I appreciate all of you
doing that I know that.
There are there are
Many of us in the room that have
very strong feelings on one side
of this issue or the other and
the I'm still at the workstation
like semi risotto I don't do
criminal law.
And the.
And I think I'm probably not
alone there most of the most was
here do not do criminal law so
we're those of us that are
trying to make policy are trying
to.
L. into an area where many of
you all have a great deal more
expertise and we appreciate that
from you today so.
Anything else before the
committee today Monday will here
three four bills but we will
also look very specifically at
the issue of rebuttable
presumptions and the
constitutional implications of
any such rebuttable presumption
so Mister chairman Senator do
hear anybody wasabi to read this
weekend could slice twenty one
through twenty four.
This electronic.
The reversion to a lot of
research about.
Since both in New Mexico and in
the federal system doesn't talk
about New Jersey but it does
talk about.
What the experts in for the
system and and in New Mexico
under the members proposals that
have been made in past
legislative legislature's
regarding perceptions yeah and
and of those were winding up the
pin the notation what one of the
issues that was raised earlier
for me with.
Those advocating for rebuttable
presumptions the governor is a
former district attorney and
others would oftentimes
analogize the federal system say
the feds to it how can it be
unconstitutional Services and
the federal constitution's
different The New Mexico
constitution and it really is
just that simple as an answer to
that so again these are of some
of the interesting topics will
address on Monday.
