Legislation is attempting to do
is for being a law enforcement
agency from disclosing the
status the location of a found
person to immediate family
members are custodian of the
pound found person should the
agency of course be informed
that the person has requested
not to disclose their location
or status Mr chair members the
committee
This is trying to address the
issue of when there is a person
who you know is a victim of a
domestic violence situation
sexual assaults and of course
has gone missing there are
sometimes Mr chairman members of
the committee with a perpetrator
actually has reported that there
are you know they're victims
missing it could be you know
your wife there girlfriend along
those lines and in suing when
they have asked and reported
that their person is missing law
enforcement sometimes of helps
in finding that person
so what we're trying to do is
just to make sure that when that
person is located.
In that if they so disclose to
the law enforcement person.
M. that that would be honored
that other location would not
then be undisclosed and Mr
chairman members of the
committee I do have with me
today are going in K. this who
is also I'm sitting with me as
an expert today.
And Mr chairman I know that
there is a there is a concern
raised in our analysis and I do
have an amendment to try and
deal with the potential conflict
with regards to impress the
inspection of public records
act.
Propose the moment we'll just
we'll take that off first order
of.
yes Mister chairman members of
the committee and I will move
of.
Senate Judiciary Committee
amendment number one to Senate
bill ninety two and essentially
Mr chairman I think it reads of
pretty much what I just
explained.
Okay are you access to the
settlement.
Questions on the amendment the
committee members Mr chair we're
we're we.
Emailed a copy of this I didn't
see it in my email.
Mr chair yes there was the
amendment was emailed out.
And Mr chair was our analyst
included in that email or was it
just sent to two members.
Senator I don't know the answer
directly but let me and if I may
have come only or.
I would like to go to our
secretary of our the secretary
or chief analyst of you know the
answer that question can you
you.
Let the members of the committee
now the procedure were adopting
to try to make sure we're
sharing documents with I share
that.
This morning.
Thank you.
came came came I'm not sure.
It is included in my emails.
All right thank you Mr chair I
just I just want to make sure
that that everybody was included
in that even though I didn't see
it it doesn't mean it it's not
in my inbox somewhere with the
five hundred emails we get today
so thank you Mr chair
of the center we're still on the
proposed amendment Sir Lopez's
explained that questions on the
member I see Senator Ivey Soto
west you recognized.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and us I guess a little confused
by the amendment.
Because it says that this is.
Not to be construed as an
exception to the provisions of
fourteen S. to dash one.
What do this one are the
exceptions to the
the special public records acts.
So if this is not to be
considered and eggs Mexican
additional suction the bridge
Department should form well the
problem is that the.
It's been HSD them.
The shop Department dystopian
are on the phone number.
When they want to work that
means that in that if.
And that's my daughter that was
missing that doesn't want me to
know where she is.
The report they say no according
to this.
Great idea at
my best friend to request a
report and they give it to my
best friend immediately
because there is no exception
and my best friend is not the
Estonian permit family members
so I'm I'm.
That seems to that seems to this
purpose of the bill which I'm
and tremendous support of.
Quite well question number two
response.
Mr chair senator this is what we
are trying again to do is just
to make sure that and if it
needs to be rewarded I would so
appreciate I just to make sure
that
That if if there is someone of
course you're president you can
always go back through and ask
of course for a public records
release so then the information
would then be released to their
the person requesting which
could be the perpetrator which
is what we're trying to address
at this point in time.
Of it was so and again that was
the attempt what we're trying to
make sure based on the analysis
that the committee had
previously posted on our
committee analysis so we're just
trying to make sure that we're
trying to address the concerns
that were raised.
Yeah that's our only let me see
if I can this pilot program.
Then the our with the analysis
of that
Our.
Get up to speed on this Mr chair
perhaps there's other business
that we could do.
What are just quickly read to
see what what the issue is
thank.
All right the behalf.
So soon look for other members
looking we recognize anyone
else.
This time.
Not seen any have C. recognize
all we're still on the amendment
itself if you have questions on
the bill Senator Lopez but the
with that so it's very
we can do this I think I could
go up prematurely perhaps to
public comment take public
comment right now I don't think
public comments affect the
amendment directly so we've
we've been asked to recognized
the two individuals what what
who where speakers for one in
opposition.
Are ready gear you in support
for two minutes followed by
James are you are in this in
opposition is Asian for two
minutes so as long as our
hopefully our.
Well.
Tech support can recognize I'm
sorry reading Jerry in
opposition for two minutes
please.
Recognize your chair.
We do not have signed up for
opposition in the waiting room
currently very good.
This guarantee for two missing.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
committee members my name is
pretty guarantee I am a student
internet do not approve and I
stand in support of Senate bill
ninety to on behalf of sexual
for services thank you so much
for your time.
You Representative people could
learn.
All right six of our public
comment Senator Ivey Soto back
on the amendment if you have the
time you need I'm running I
guess I'm wondering why we don't
want this to be a natural.
Exception to across.
As well as provided by law.
Because these are people who
don't want to be found.
Mr chairman the way that the
bill was originally proposed and
written we felt very comfortable
with it but again the concerns
that were raised by an analysis
is where we were trying to make
sure that we're addressing
the concerns raised in the
analysis.
Well All.
If we don't then I'm fine.
Yeah I actually I guess I'm Mr
chairman and senator Lopez my
feeling is that.
Is that we're going to make any
moment but we have to do is and
in that same subsection C. for
the page to.
On.
Line seven aids.
Instead of staying on point
agencies are not report focus
during our municipality member
pursuant to subsection B. of the
section if the press is been
found that that the personal
confidentiality regarding
process location.
I'm I think it's I think I think
we almost we're one of
But in their change that to say
a law enforcement agency shall
not.
Report to any.
I think those are brought inside
in there to do anything on law
enforcement's.
Not possible.
This is not report to so the
president wants to in a.
And start.
To any non law enforcement
entity.
Work to.
That way if the custodian or
maybe a family member works
along for students.
Then there still excluded from
from getting that information
but I mean I could see where
where they need to you know if
the Gallup police find somebody
they might need a lot more
please no stop looking for them.
But why is what part of looking
for confidentiality to these
people we are given actual
confidentiality it seems to me.
Okay so Mr chairman I'm are you
looking then to amend
specifically another amended
into the bill and not on the
particular amendment we have in
front of us or you could just go
that through one more time
certainly so what I'm suggesting
is that instead of the amendment
that was shared by.
By our
the staff.
Two in Staten do and they are
and amendments.
That on page two line seven.
After the word to.
And service.
Any normal.
Law enforcement.
And to T..
And and so that would be that
would be the proposed amendment
that I would that I would
suggest instead of what our
staff.
Might help out with.
So the church choir Senator Ivey
Soto is proposing.
The amendment will turning in
the one that Senator Lopez
president is that correct that
is correct Representative
discussion Senator Lopez are you
prepared to withdraw your
proposed enrollment no members
so that we can discuss that
arrives on the proposed
amendment yes Mr chairman I will
withdraw all right Senator Ivey
Soto of give us a specific
language again on on the page
line so Natalie contracted and
explain why you believe that
would be a superior amendment
certainly so if the patient line
seven after the work to.
I'm just for the record a your
play.
Insert any non law enforcement.
And she.
Are to.
Okay.
I'm comfortable that Mr chairman
one.
Hello I want to trust you to
interrupt me if you don't have
the amendment I think we're
clear on it.
the sponsor considers to be a
friendly amendment yes the
further discussion on the
proposed amendment.
Senator Pirtle on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman and just
to be consistent with the
paragraph of further down it
says law enforcement agency do
you want to be consistent with
that language in this paragraph.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chairman and and concern
Senator that's that's actually
the reason why I went
I was for second Bobby person
would end to do there is I set
and to see although I recognize
it's a little bit I'm this is is
because our.
Because they are like a nine one
one center or.
What I mean I can imagine that
there are there are there are
there are some folks who work.
As part of this but they're not
an agency present.
And so is is is messed our
campus here on this bill on the
bill.
He's on our bill.
Miss miss case you have to have
a suggest whether we want to do
our our agency.
I really don't I'm sorry Senator
what.
I'm not an apologize workforce
struggling with themselves
you know at.
You know I I think I think I
think agencies probably defined
term and so we I'm I'm I'm
I did with agencies that
eventually.
And Mr chair what entity would
also cool in the DA's office
would not.
I would.
Are all also prosecutor I think
affected we consider part of law
enforcement.
Our I know I'm trying to get
people that just that into while
I was there for some.
Probably recent
and and so.
Our.
You know I guess I'm.
I'm I'm I'm happy to changed
HSD.
Mr chairman I ask the question
on that yes then center this is
your moment with us to make a
decision it will pick your
poison I will go with it
certainly let me let me let me
let me see with federal business
Russia's first Senator Lopez Mr
chair based on the question of
Senator Pirtle and are discussed
and the discussion just previous
a law enforcement agency or
entity because could also be
included as and investigations.
entity also or if they're not
specifically in HSD.
I'm just trying to think of
making sure that it could be
someone else who would be coming
up as a
detective.
Also be included as an agency.
It would have to do.
Discussion on.
Okay just my question thank you
thank you Mr Senator Ivey Soto
summarize your enrollment for us
please expanding it
specifically.
Specifically summarized as
follows.
Page two.
Between the world's two and
eight and starts.
Law enforcement entity.
More to.
The amendment before the
committee I see no one else
wishing to be recognized their
objection to adoption of the
amendment.
Missing on madam and it's a
tough Senator Pirtle adopt a
Jack in the amendment.
The other objection Sir Moores
the amendment.
Many others Senator Pirtle
center course in opposition all
of members present in support of
the amendments adopted.
service studies on the floor.
Mr chairman our I will just make
that a lot of time in order to
to programs one is this is.
I think we've attempted this
before it's it's something that
is that is really needed
You know there are distraught
section two was still the
section point nine fifteen dash
eight I'm I'm always
uncomfortable with the statute
that provides for the agency to
do our financial information by
Warren except that that is the
entire statute that they have
and has been in place since
nineteen ninety five so I'm not
going to mess with that right
now but someday we should
probably make a note to revise
also statutes but given that is
the the structure that they have
and I'm reading at the end as
except as provided pursuant to
twenty nine fifty fifteen dash I
and I think we've been
sufficiently
Specific there are with Senator
offices bill nobody else has
anything else to say I guess I
would never do drugs right
before I take you to pass motion
I have a couple of questions
myself I'm looking at this is
for Saddam Office or anyone you
wish call center opens
one make sure that we're that
we're we're we're we're putting
this in law is not going to
create problems with the probate
code.
But see.
We're amending twenty nine
fifteen.
I.
Here's my concern that the new
proposed language says law
enforcement should not report to
a custodian we're meeting family
members so dystopian is a
legal relationship that somebody
has you may be appointed as a
custodian yes Representative
under certain areas of the law
and I want to have a situation
where person is a custodian has
an obligation.
The somebody to care for them to
know where they're at and and
then this law would say the same
cannot be told where the person
is that.
Simply because the person does
not wish to custodian and
narrow.
I certainly understand and
support the intention here to
protect persons who
Reasons to be fearful or poor
we're streaming
no others but but help me if
anyone can with with the work
Estonian here shall not require
tech associate what happens when
it when there's.
somebody whose work above
pointed as a dystopian for a
child perhaps with the capacity
and then Amanda this law it gets
adopted are we send a law
enforcement cannot tell the
story in.
Where prison being protected is
located how how how money the
wrong in my reading of the law
and we adopt.
Service.
Mr chair of course win K. this
is here to help answer all that
but I do believe that we have
different statutes that cover
children
who are declared missing
etcetera etcetera but if I could
that let me if this case could
also help to answer.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Yes there are different statutes
for children so this would apply
only to adults.
Well aware of that.
Senator is relevant to minors
but.
I'm not my question is not
limited only to minors what what
happens again let's say just
send a person whose team very in
need of of microserver or
guardianship.
American they've been appointed
as a custodian so it's eight
cents an adult with the the
some form of disability work or
mental illness or something
where there's a custodian
appointed for that person.
We would your law.
Help me to understand why why I
should be concerned here law
would allow that person.
To essentially break away from
that custodial environments echo
so no homework a social
environment and then and then
insist on this law that the
person who's been charged
responsibility for that person
cannot recall whether at just
just make sure former persuade
me that the your law is not
going to interfere with that.
Mr chair members of the
committee at speak to that.
Often times we say our
custodians as the abusive person
and so we would not want that
custodian to know the location
of someone who is being abused.
Well that's a different problem
that that in that case that's
because the person was appointed
custodian with the wrong person
to be appointed as a custodian.
But it but it doesn't address my
question which is once again
thank my scenario you've got a
legitimate individual was in the
the custodian the court
appointed custodian of that
person and then that we adopt
your law the person breaks away
from the
residents are the location or
where they're being care for the
break away from the custodian
which I imagine happens after
that happens probably pretty
frequently.
With Dr law.
Law enforcement would be
prohibited from telling the
custodian.
Where the the person is that.
And I'm not sure I think that's
a very good idea I have not yet
got an answer that persuades me
you're a lot of them do this.
Mr chairman you know for at and
there have been some cases Mr
chairman members of the
committee where we do have again
of adults who have run away in
certain cases and of for those
who may have some of the
capacity ation you know with
their mental capacity it's so
those are still far and few
between
what we're hoping again to focus
on this is specifically for
those primarily women who have
run away who have escaped and
actually maybe could be in a
safe house at this point in time
and if they're found you know
law enforcement is does their
due diligence and if they don't
want to be reported based on the
person who's asking this is just
another opportunity it is there
for the victim to say I don't
want to be found you know X.
person is looking for you this
is a we found we need to make a
report please don't report to
this ex person because again of
the issues of the abuse.
for those again who are minors
this is an emancipated minor
there's you know that does move
them up into the next category
but those who are children of
course that brings into all the
other contexts if you're under
the age of seventeen.
But primarily this is trying to
cover for those who are victims
of of it mystic violence
situation.
And I hope I've been clear would
you Senator my colleagues that I
support that units in fact
please I can understand the need
and I agree we've been trying to
do this for a very long time I
want to support that goal at the
same time not.
In a situation where I thank you
we adopt this from my reading of
it we we would be creating which
again is a a person who of let's
say they're they're put into
custody of a group called.
Person with special needs or is
Aureolus maybe they leave the
group home and then this law
would say that the law
enforcement cannot tell the
group will work there receiving
of care should I tell them where
the person that that does not
seem to be allies of policy but
I'm I'm not yet satisfied that
this is narrow as it should be
and and I wish there was R. O.
right now to sexual abuse of New
of course and in those cases I
would support this a hundred
percent but thank you for
answering my questions anyone
else on the committee questions.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr when I think Senator Pirtle
has.
Okay I'm sorry I missed you
Senator Pirtle several men
etcetera I guess so.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
I was
curious about with the new
amendment in place who could be
informs.
With with the with the
paragraphs then changed.
Mr chairman Senator of the
intent of the what we're
discussing at this point is that
no one.
If if if the person is asking
not to let this other entity and
who's asking
as the process goes Mr chairman
senator of someone goes missing
if the perpetrator of wants to
find this person because they've
left the home for fear whatever
the case is they have to go in
and call and make a missing
persons report.
So law enforcement will do their
due diligence when the person is
found
the person if this bill was to
pass of course is to say
the names given I don't want to
be found by this person and
that's that's kind of the
relationship that we're looking
at with the adoption of the
amendment at this point is that
any law enforcement entity would
not be required based on a per
request I mean there's this
whole your slower things where
this perpetrator would be
looking for information.
Is there so determined to find
her.
I mean it's just for me very
simple explanation that I hope
that answers your question Mr
chair.
And and
Mr chair and senator is are
there any circumstances where
the person might need to be
contacted for something
important by somebody that is
not the perpetrator or or the
accused or what have you that
then they will be able to be
contacted is there any type of
unintended consequence there I
mean I'm all about somebody's
right to to.
Move on and and start over I
think that's that's you know one
important thing that we honor
that for those that that really
need to do that and are able to
to get away and don't want to be
found but is is there any kind
of unintended consequence there
that that might occur or
Being new to Judiciary Committee
is there any way that this
person might be a witness in a
case and need to be contacted is
there any.
Type of repetition there in my
in my missing something Mr chair
Senator.
Mr chair representative again
the intent of this legislation
is to help those who are a
victim of a crime.
And as as my scenario I propose
to is that if they are in a
shelter the shelter already
knows who aware of what and how
to systematic them sometimes a
victim may go to another family
member maybe a friend in the
community of where they are
hiding of the and try to of
course you know you see other
routes that they have for
information to get out for other
services that are needed.
Miss Kay this is there anything
else if I could Mr chair for my
witness to also answer.
Mr chairman members of the
Senator Lopez just act to at
The custodian I can tell you
from experience that in our
soldiers in New Mexico we have
had people that have come to the
shelter who have been abused by
somebody in the thing that the
shelters do is to call the
office of guardianship so that
they can be notified that there
is an abusive situation.
Consisting of our
noted in so that they can go
over that
that piece.
And then.
Just in terms of notifying all
someone is in a shelter
Law enforcement or anyone really
can call that sheltered say if
this person is there can you
give them this information and
that is how information is
disseminated to the victim.
And
so I think that that's pretty
well covered for victims that
need to go to shelters Senator
Lopez referenced many victims go
to other family or friends or
to a safe location a hotel or or
something like that.
And and Mr chair and senator I I
appreciate that but the the
language in the new paragraph
isn't specific to people who are
in those situations it's open to
to anyone so how do we how do we
narrow this down to be specific
to the intent.
you know my question was in a
more broad a more broad sense
not limited to the the
situations that that you're
discussing
that's where my clarification
that's that's a clarification I
need is how do we actually have
this bill to what the intent is
and not have the unintended
consequences that it could
possibly have as written.
Senator Pirtle is our direct
question to the senator just
center opens.
It Mr chair to and I don't know
how we get there but I mean
that's a Mr chair and senator is
there a way that we could put
some language that would
accomplish exactly what you're
wanting to to narrow it to where
it needs to be narrowed down to
Mr chair and senator.
I'm Mr chair if I may
There could be a potential
solution maybe and Senator Ivey
Soto would you like to.
Propose an amendment.
The.
Mr chair if it if it would be in
order for me just a suggest
something and and I would ask
Miss Kate's to make sure I get
the language right but I think
on page.
Two line twelve after the
period.
We would in service our if the
missing person is an
incapacitated person.
Requests confidentiality
regarding the present status and
location.
The law enforcement agency shall
inform the guardianship or
conservatorship faults.
The person has been found and
has requested confidentiality
regarding the present status and
location that allows the court
to take whatever action part
thanks would be appropriate and
and and the status of my my
specific question is whether I I
I raised I use the right phrase
what I said are some from the
guardianship or conservatorship
for but the press is been found
we're sorry the term right that
would be used.
You are muted it is the.
Guardianship and
conservatorship.
The adults party in chip and
conservative.
Yeah adult guardianship and
conservatorship what's.
Alright this.
I'm sorry.
This
Of the judicial branch of New
Mexico adult guardianship of the
judicial branch of New Mexico.
That's that's that's within each
district not correct there's not
just a single office.
I'm sorry let me look this up
okay.
And this chair is as soon as as
soon as we get that answer that
we can pop that Cork language
and and and and up on I hope
that dress that I think I think
it's a it's a it's because
mission that you raised and if
the if the court has informed
the court that can do what the
court needs to do it in terms of
of if there's an abuse situation
our address that if there's a
reason to separate the guardian
or conservator from the from the
incapacitated person address
that or if they're simply a up
so we have a
an issue with regard to the
incapacitation that doesn't
require a separation all of the
relationship the department
address as well.
Mr chairman.
Members of the committee Senator
Ivey Soto it is the office of
guardianship.
Okay I'm I appreciate that I'm
on the program but myself as
well and and I just because I
want to make sure we get it
right I don't know there's a
single office for the whole
state the and.
the best case of that be that's
the part that would be very
much.
Mr chair if I may add to this
conversation also as we're
looking for a way to address
some of your concerns Mr
chairman I know that there's a
provided of legislation working
its way through this legislative
time that will actually
consolidate the office of
guardianship I believe in the DD
PC about one at this point in
time so we can have some
consolidation of that so that
that's if it if it gets there of
course I by the governor you'll
be another place in which to put
you place this what we're
calling at this point Mr
chairman.
Members.
So you of some but Senator do a
joint and Senator I see you
coming next behind your sent Mr
Mr chair if I'm not mistaken
last of the floor.
I'm sorry I thought you were
done you're correct you.
Thank you Mr chair
and is there anything Mr chair
senator in the paragraphs as
right now that would prevent the
a judge order or a court order
of location for for any reason
of a missing person that's been
found.
Mr chairman senator this is just
asking for a law enforcement
agency shall not report you not
see that it mentions a court
order.
Well it says to a law
enforcement entity I'm just I'm
just wanted to make sure the
language that we've put in here
wouldn't inhibit something like
that.
I'm I Mr chair senator I don't
see we're it would prohibit a
court order.
And then Mr chairman and senator
where
being new.
Is there a separate section of
law that deals with minor
specifically.
With similar missing persons
language.
Mr chair representative.
Mr chair senator I don't have
the information to frenemy at
this point but yes there is a
separate section of law that
deals with missing children.
And Mr chair senator this could
be interpreted in a way to apply
to apply to minors in any way no
Sir Mr chair senator to.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you senator.
Thank you Mr chair on the
amendment I would just recommend
and seven of the eight
capacitate person in danger
person is already the defined
term
in the same group of statutes
twenty nine fifteen to E. R. and
it defines in danger person as
someone in imminent danger of
causing harm to them self to
another
and in danger of being harmed by
another who or who has been
harmed by another include clues
people who are victims of crime
is provided and crimes against
household members.
Folks who are covered by an
order of protection folks have
dementia Alzheimers or another
degenerative brain disorder
brain injury and or the
developmental disability so I
think that that since it's
already a defined term and I
think it would cover the whole
spectrum of folks that we're
concerned with on this point
that that language should be
used the staff.
Mr chairman thank you senator do
heck and I think you're
referring them to the language
that Senator Ivey Soto had
proposed.
Of on the.
At this point Mr chair senator
ESO would just be from from
Senator Ivey Soto those
amendment changing and so
incapacitated to endangered.
I'm fine with that Mr chairman
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yeah actually I think that's all
the problematic.
And and we always I think it's a
little problematic is because
that eight doesn't well that's
in that same article of law that
doesn't fit within the the
specific chat statutes that
we're looking at here and
And and and the other thing is
that eight the person who is
incapacitated more may not
actually be in the.
We don't know this yet.
And so that's that's part of the
reason why we want to
information from the forks.
And our and so.
Right is that is that.
Is president more men often
engage point.
About what.
Mr chair senator.
That's true and and and I think
despite the use of the word
endangered here I think that so
if we're dealing with someone
say with with a brain injury.
They would still fall under this
category of endangered just not
the LA men's maybe I
misunderstand what you're
saying.
I wonder it just concerns me to
use a squishy term like
incapacitated without defining
that I think if if we're gonna
use a term like that it it would
be good task to know exactly
what that means if if if.
With with the existing defined
terms would stand I would I
would lead you.
On the Senator are doing.
To run out to look at
I mean I I got that I got that
from the.
Also the Yasser but in the
also to present that's from
S. reference probably come from
conservatorship and and
graduation rates so there's a
custodian custodian is code for
conservative archiving.
At the terminal terminal
guardian.
All right your only apply a
conservator guardian in New
Mexico past dated Chris.
So so that's that's the reason
that's the reason why I use that
phrase is of that is in fact
actually eight point.
As I recall that is a that is a
total of our when when dealing
with
people who are under a
conservatorship or a
guardianship.
And Mr chair senator that's
correct but but here in the in
the missing persons information
reporting act custodians also
just defined term and it is it
is broader than I think what
you're looking at under that.
Custodian guardianship back to
it that's any it means a parent
guardian or any other person who
exercises legal fist physical
control care custody of a child
or an adult with developmental
disability or person who
performs one or more activities
of daily living for an adult and
that person who provides one
more activities of daily living
for an adult could be far
outside someone who.
Having a conservatorship or
guardianship I mean you you can
have someone a custodian who is
doing that with no no
guardianship or conservatorship
in place.
I just I do see what you mean
our.
And thank you.
People often that it's.
Mr chairman I don't want to work
with the committee.
On this our
I also do want to be sure that
we are able to.
To address this.
Right here today the
With what Senator represents
permission what it be possible
for us to.
Our move on to a couple of bills
we don't have a very long agenda
overall.
And and and and and maybe we can
come back to this.
Mr chairman I'm willing to see
if we can figure out the
terminology
before we end the committee
today so please.
On this.
Thank you yes good input on the
legitimate concerns or questions
I appreciate you being willing
to address those will pass over
for the moment Senate bill
ninety to resume action on that.
With a little bit more time are
given Senator Lopez throughout
your its money and quit the next
matter then be part of the
Senate bill one thirty four.
Senator Diamond hello I see you
in the group.
What's on your you.
Sierra.
Mr chair can you hear me.
Yes thank you thank you I
believe that our expert
witnesses are having a little
bit of a problem if they could
be let into the committee as
well.
Showing on the aeration list
judged works or is Jerry rice
Lee and Tom I staff has the
individuals who you.
I would choose experts is that
correct.
Yes are and are waiting in your
waiting room we'll give our.
Mr chair Senator they are in the
gym room I admitted that just a
minute ago.
All right now Mr Darman will
take about ten minutes for you
to allocate what you're actually
doing your own presentation on
Senate one thirty four ten
minutes please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
my first time to join you here
in Judiciary south to pleasure
to be here I am bringing forward
a bill that was initially
introduced by representative
Garcia and Senator wrong most
which allows for substitution
probate judges so currently
probate judges are the only
level at the judiciary it does
not have a replacement plan in
the event of their their
absence so probate judges only
have authority to practices you
know and home county of which
they were elected so if the
judge become sick or
incapacitated another sitting
probate judges not allowed to
substitute our in in their
absence so this effort that
we're bringing forward today in
this bill is supported by all
thirty three of New Mexicos
probate judges before I
introduce my expert witnesses I
will note that in the event of
incapacity District Court judges
are allowed to substitute the
absence of a probate judge some
of the challenges with that have
been expressed that the filing
fees are five times more
expensive and because often
their dockets are so backlogged
that it's really an ineffective
means of trying to avoid backlog
in the court system the only
financial impacts of this bill
that we are aware of is that the
county receiving the services of
a substitute judge would have to
pay for per diem expenses
because those judges are
salaried their salary would just
continue on so I want to move on
to better explain the details of
of the concern and propose
solutions I do have three expert
witnesses with me today I have
judge Tom has tax current
probate judge of Sierra County
my home county judge Gary Ridley
attorney and former former
probate judge of San Juan County
and I have judged right Torres
current probate judge of San
Miguel so Mr judge passed act
you're available which you.
proceed.
The judge before you begin again
we've allowed ten minutes to the
entire presentation so please
allocate your time with that in
mind funds which is behind
budget.
Thank you Mr chairman the
members of the committee.
This Senator Diamond you stole
my thunder you.
Just about everything I want to
say you covered it very well.
Senator as we all know from time
to time any one of us could
become sick or disabled and
unable to perform our jobs.
Of most of our positions have a
plan in place to keep business
moving when we are incapacitated
and as so Senator Diamond
mentioned that probate judges
are the only.
Of level of the judiciary the
does not have a backup plan in
place or subsidizes.
And she's corrected under the
current law.
under a.
It is New Mexico statutes thirty
four dash seven dash eleven.
The district judges may preside
over probate matters but it's
really a very impractical
solution to the problem.
for several reasons not only the
cost.
And there are delaying their
dockets.
The overwhelming majority of
people that file in our probate
courts are pro se litigants
upwards of ninety eighty to
ninety percent.
And the pro se litigants are
very very apprehensive about to.
Filing anything in the District
Court.
I'll give you an example last
year I had to have spinal
surgery I was out for seven
weeks.
And during before I left I told
County clerk if anybody comes in
the need probate work tell them
they can either wait till I get
back or they can go over to the
District Court which is just two
blocks down the street.
And during that seven week
period the clerks recorded
twelve walk ins and eleven phone
calls.
At all twenty three people when
they were told.
They could either wait till I
get back or go to the District
Court in all twenty three said.
Awaits they did not want to go
to District Court and I'm
assuming my situation is not
that unique.
Anyway this is a hero.
Senate bill one thirty four is
designed to close the absent
judge gap using sitting probate
judges from other counties the
bill does have the approval of
all thirty three probate judges
New Mexico as the approval of
the New Mexico association of
counties.
And again the only financial
impact would be the cost of
mileage and per diem for the the
county receiving the visiting
judge Mr chair Senators I ask
that you give this bill you do
pass recommendation and I stand
for any questions.
Thank you next speaker so that
one recognizing a speaker yes
please I'd like to introduce a
judge Gary Ridley of San Juan
County.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
senators a I'm Gary Risley I
have recently been reported back
to the bench after having.
Pleasure serving eight years
about ten years ago so this is a
public service problem that we
have that we're seeking to solve
through this legislation is a
dish best that told you
well the District Court judge
may come over is sign on
documents that are present that
doesn't happen a whole lot for
example when my for a social
left the office there was a six
to seven week gap before us in
the the the role of which
everyone of those probate set on
that this year that intro I
think the court you're also
aware that we have a lot of
multi county districts are
district courts so in the more
rural areas it's not often that
District Court judge gets out
there and they do they usually
have a pretty full docket and
walk you know we're we're
thinking about doing probate
judge of duties this is really
how they agenda so this gives us
an alternative a very
inexpensive alternative to allow
a probate judge Jennifer
neighboring county to come over
clear out the docket Wallace
sitting there these we are a
ministerial duty most of the
time we're reviewing making sure
all the requirements the law
have been met we decided minute.
Basis to probate whether they're
inform in the form of a
administrations because there's
no will or there there is the
will so it is something that
think very very cost effective
as the with us the statue sits
fourth it says that
you know it has to be with
permission county commissioners
we Campos after permission but
at the same time I think it
gives an opportunity to serve
the communities that we serve
which of those are generally are
not represented by lawyers don't
understand the process really
well we're the people's court
for purposes of probate and we
would ask for do Pasolini's
legislation.
Thank you.
So next yes Sir judge Dwight
Torres of San Miguel County
please.
Thank you senators for allowing
me to speak this afternoon on
behalf Senate bill one thirty
four just to chime off of but
judge passed that can just
really have both stated in
speaking to our constituents
here
In the semi guilt area we have a
lot of constituents that have a
forty five mile drive just to
get to the county seat and many
times if if they come out here
and the judges out for an
extended period of time and the
tools that they need to go
through the District Court well
most these people come from low
economic areas and therefore
many of them can barely for the
thirty dollar County filing fee
that that we charge as opposed
to the hundred thirty two
dollars at the district court's
charge and yes that's a that's a
big impact on them and many of
them the ones I've talked to you
know we're told that they've got
to do is go to District Court
you know because of some of them
you know like city come from a
lot of the little ranch is a lot
of them are you know have a new
have a little low education many
of them in in line on my area
cannot speak English really well
so ask them to go before a
district judge in a formal
setting sort of give them a out.
Eighty eight and insecure
feeling that they'd rather just
wait until such time that the
can just see myself or another
judge in again like judge best
accent you know the municipal
courts magistrate courts and
district courts have that tool
that they are provided as far as
allowing visiting judges so for
us to be able to have that tools
to help our constituents would
be a big budget was elected
Risley said that of the
financial impact to the counties
you know is not that significant
since we are all on a set salary
the only other expense to the
county would be the standard per
diem and mileage that would be
required for one of us to go
down to a visiting County and
sit there with a B. one day a
week one day every other week a
couple times a month whatever it
until that seed is build or
until the the probate judge
comes back up again I do ask
that you do a to pass on this
Senate bill and in the
consideration of our
constituents four counties.
You.
All right Sir I'm is that
Cover everyone expected have
present with you yes Sir thank
you for your time Mr chairman
will stand for questions.
Why have of.
Individuals who asked for the
public to be recognized in
opposition.
For the meeting today merry out
to DO and well a point.
With the.
Would we allow those plays into
the committee meeting for public
comment first follow verify that
we have ms Merion CEO and oil
Quint us have public input.
Mr chair yesterday is not in the
waiting room but we do have on
judge wrote a director the.
Your recognize for two minutes
Sir.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman and members my name is
Roy oil Quinn Colfax County
probate judge and once you know
that I support SB one thirty
four thank you.
Well that's pretty good
opposition.
all right I don't show anyone
else's asked we recognize from
the public on this legislation
will turn next center go to
questions or comments from the
committee so on Senate bill one
thirty four committee members.
Senator do.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
AUMENT I have a question
and in this question might be
for for the the judges
If someone has filed appropriate
action and.
Then later are the probate
judge's unavailable and the
district judge does exercise the
concurrent jurisdiction.
That the person who did the
filing they're not paying a new
filing fee the new hire District
Court I thank you are thank.
Thank you senator do heck I'm
gonna let judge obviously answer
that please.
The.
Use your question thank in
District Court judge come over
without the transfer of the file
the probate court in science of
the doctor.
The matter is already presently
before the court what usually
happens though is that the
county courts don't understand a
lot of this maybe this is for
individuals to go across the
District Court to file the
initial probate.
In the informal receding review
not.
Manage their docket so to speak
and you would and the District
Court at a fall or is.
Rations so once the agent but in
many the probate absent
objections being raised by some
party or another the case by the
personal representative
inclusion without further action
by the COVID course that would
be an unusual circumstantial our
rice it works such the conflict
arose family searched by
yourself we can't by ordered R.
or transfer the case to the
District Court of there is a
there are some County District
Court works because it we strive
and transport in general do not
charge to be that there are some
that do investors are case by
case basis that has not been
served statewide but I don't.
Mr chairman and senator judge
thank you.
So that all.
Yes yes with the other members
the committee with questions or
comments.
Moviepass.
Senator Moores has a motion for
new pass that get.
Then server with the second I
see Senator Ivey Soto asked we
recognized that I believe
Senator Lopez you awesome
etcetera so we're next to center
I'm so focused Lopez wanted to
pass motion certainly so.
And our mission I'm I'm I'm
have you know Senator Lopez
posted and all all.
Senator Lopez.
Mr chairman
Senator Diamond just a question
if there of the probate judges
are authorized by the county is
that correct.
At Senator Lopez yes ma'am there
if they are elected within the
county and they can only
represent and work in their own
County as it stands now.
Okay Mister chairman Senator.
So if there is a vacancy for
whatever the reason is and say
and a place to counties away
it do you this law is trying to
authorize that appointment to to
happen so that you session by
passing the next counties of
legal authority we I guess
vested in the county commission.
Is that what you're attempting
to do Mr yeah Mr chairman and
and Senator Lopez what this is
attempting to do is a lot and
make allowances for a probate
judge to practice outside of
their county jurisdiction in the
absence of another probate judge
was invited them to substitute
and they're off and their
absence.
Okay Mister chairman senators so
what is the practice right now.
Mr chairman and senator Lopez
there is none so when it when it
judges or probate judge for some
reason whether they're ill or
incapacitated is unable to
perform their duties the only
means of someone to see if
probate judge at this time is
they can apply to see a District
Court judge and so for the
reasons that these judges
explained there's a backlog
there's a large increase in
filing fees sometimes there's
just certainly a desire not to
use a district judge and so they
are waiting for that probate
judge to return to the bench.
A and Mr chairman senator I
guess.
I know that over the years you
know there there of have been
concerns raised with regards to
no probate probate judges within
our communities
I think I understand what you're
what you're proposing to do that
I guess I have some concerns
With with this at this point in
time and maybe I'll listen to
some more dialogue of that I
have some some concerns at this
point Mr chairman thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman.
All yes I did I'll confess Lance
I have some real hard work with
this bill
by the end of this bill is is is
as follows and all and I'll try
to build an organized about this
first of all of this has the
endorsement of the probate
judges and of the association
counties that are not here that
have the enforcement of the of
the administrative office of the
courts are nor did I hear that
have the endorsement of the
spring part of the state of New
Mexico our judges and judges are
subject to their jurisdiction
and and so this seems to be
going around that are along the
lines of going around that and
one of the structural problems
that is in this
In this bill.
Is that you don't have on page
two.
Lines are.
Sixteen and seventeen.
Hi.
You your are that the
that the judge plans to be
unavailable blaze the just gonna
be available I'm just so with
the approval of the board of
county commissioners arm and
that are and and so that.
And then you have on further
down.
On page three line twelve.
Warrick county commissioners of
the county of the unavailable
uninterested probate judge are
charlatans from then whether a
district judge or visiting
probate judge will fulfil the
unavailable probate judges
duties it is not reporter county
commissioners to make a
determination as to point
structure.
and so that is that is that
those outside of the of the
judicial branch procedures.
It also creates some real
problems in terms of the
concurrent jurisdiction that
exists between the District
Court in the probation work in
fact actually the probate court
is the only for.
More another court has
completes.
Jurisdiction.
Everything that they do are
which is the District Court on
that County.
Which is why we don't have this
provision before.
And and so and so what you're
what you're creating
structurally it's a situation
where we're going to
appropriations AJ go to the
board kind of commissioners to
get somebody else brought in.
You've got to just report that
has that Aston contradiction.
The District Court has
supervisory authority over the
probate courts.
This report was completely I.
And
if if you had if you had the
relationship building with the
presiding judge of the of the
district court's.
To be able to do that we have at
least have been within the
construction.
Your your genius are completely
going outside that was struck.
You don't limits many the point
of turnover judge within the
same judicial districts are are
for more appointments in fact if
you look at the statutes that
provide for the appointment of a
magistrate judge or magistrate
district it is only a magistrate
judge what serves within this
setting judicial district
wanted to go from morning
magistrate district the county.
Administrative district and the
county happy with the same
judicial district you know you
don't have that in here at all
in this bill Encinal answer
structurally this bill does not
work for them the judicial
branch of government does not
been written through the
judicial process I'm
legislation.
General for us to to come
through and consider this it
just rocks the supervisory
authority of the District Court
and it does not respect the
middle court structure that
takes points and so R. O. where
we're at Adams those reasons
I'm I'm afraid I'm not gonna be
able to to support the bill
today I I do appreciate which is
really important and this is an
issue actually that I have I had
some conversation with the
supreme about then when I come
in and there were issues on
different
probate judges closing because
counting offices were closed and
affirming judges and and summit
counties didn't choose to close
is that the county offices
closed and then how are they
going to be able to do their
work and the fact that district
judges have the in in some
counties they have exercised
their the concurrent
jurisdiction on probate matters
and and and other counties we
were able to arrange for rural
for profit managed we still file
through the county park and and
for the probably just be able to
sign all of the paperwork
dependent on what was going on
in that particular county so to
get the concern of the approach
that is that is on fourth year
is not appropriate growth within
the judicial branch of
government more is that work is
this like I said been vetted
through judicial branch of
government as as in the bill
dealing with on the structure on
the judiciary should be that so
thank you are there I appreciate
very much that you that should
not despondent and hopeless some
at some point that will be able
to have a
actually appropriate
conversation about these issues.
Committee members on the bill.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for for bringing this is
an interesting point Senator
Ivey Soto made about a
magistrate judges because no
Chavis county I've had a
district judge.
making County before thank
definitely not within my
district.
Court districts so the very
interesting point
My question is more along the
lines of.
The fact that I don't see
anywhere Mr chair and senator
that.
the case that the probate
judge's gonna sit or is there
any consent to that change from
somebody besides the county
commission or the or the judge
itself.
Mr chair.
Question directed to Senator.
Yes Mr chairman and senator
portal thank you I'm gonna yield
my time I I understand your your
concern on the yield my time and
have an answer from judge
because have staff if you please
respond judge.
Mr chair Senators.
Senator Ivey Soto
not to be disrespectful but.
You were incorrect I'm a retired
magistrate judge and I can tell
you firsthand that there was no
restriction to if we took
transfer cases we were not
limited to our own judicial
district I took cases all over
the state now we did have to
have the District Court the head
of the District Court.
In that district.
Sign the paper authorizing us
but we do travel all over the
place.
Senator Pirtle your concerns.
With their some of the questions
all the ones that are kinda lost
my train of thought could could
you repeat your question again
please.
Thank you Mr chair my concern is
Who would consent to allowing
another judge come and one that
the the the people involved did
not vote for so that's that's a
concern that that I have how do
we have a consent from that side
of it of of having a new judge
come in and and preside over the
case if the sitting judge
because it says or is
unavailable.
You know sometimes that means
will they be available next week
well I'd rather have the judge
that is elected within my
jurisdiction.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle if I
may.
First of all that this bill is
intended.
Only to cover if it judges out
for an extended period of time
if the judge knows like in my
case I knew I was going in for
spinal surgery I knew I was
going to be out would be great
but I had with doctor.
If I could have another judge
come and fill in for me during
that seven week period because
is is you know justice delayed
is justice denied so the
citizens of Sierra County were
denied.
My server the services of
probate for seven weeks.
The reason that.
Judges can leave for lots of
different reasons judges can
either quit sometimes they die
in office sometimes are out for
extended period of time if they
quit or die or are removed from
office.
Then the judge would be replaced
according to statute the judge
will be replaced by the county
commission that's that's already
in place.
If the judge is just out of the
temporary illness.
If he knows he's going to be out
like a like a predetermined
surgery.
The judge would have the ability
to contact another judge within
the state hopefully one close
by.
That could come in and fill in
for him during his absence.
The flip side of that would be
if a judge for example had a
heart attack didn't know it was
coming and he was hoping for an
extended period of time the
county commission would make the
decision whether they want to
bring in another judge and the
reason we bring the county
commission in is because there's
a cost involved the county
commission would have to pay
mileage and per diem.
So if you're in San Juan County
you're certainly not going to
call the judge from any County.
Because the mileage and per diem
would be astronomical you're
going to.
All content which in some
relatively close proximity.
Senate president your question.
It and Mr Mr chair you know I
just want to know if there was a
way to put language that
Would allow save the executor or
somebody involved in the case to
consent to a judge being brought
in that if they said you know
I'd rather wait for the judge
that was elected in the district
that they're supposed to preside
over as opposed to having a
judge come in from a district
that they didn't vote on.
Is there a way to add that that
type of language in that that
way it's it's not out of the
hands of those involved in the
in the case.
But I answer that.
Yes please alright Mr chair
center pirtle first of all no
one is our if a person feel
compelled to wait until the
their judge from there county
came back from whatever the
illness was they certainly have
the right to wait there's
nothing forcing them to file
their probate now.
it just gives them an option.
If they did need the probate
taken care of and they didn't
want to wait until their their
hometown Gen.
They would have the opportunity
to to to take care of their
probate with this visiting
judge.
That's the theory behind it.
And I would I'll defer to judge
righteously.
If if I may.
Senator your question too is
your concern was well deserved
and Representative I left an
individual who's coming to
perform task in these
communities and to.
Yes but the same time there's a
buffer there and that the
elected board of commissioners
in that particular county or
authorizing that action and if
they did not wish to spend the
funds to have the.
Okay judge come from a
neighboring county they can just
say request the District Court
to do it and then invited the
Senator Ivey Soto those concerns
of the bank maybe some
misunderstanding about where we
rank in the pecking order here
the probate courts are uniquely
a county functions similar to to
some degree of municipal Courts
AOC has limited no jurisdiction
what we do although we are
seventy two Supreme Court orders
I like magistrates courts it is
so we we don't have judicial
districts that we were part of
and and part of that system and
and and and.
County office were officer
jurisdictions to the limit of
our county.
In other that the but that's the
statutory limit and so what this
would do would be create an
exception to the statutory limit
by stating that on a temporary
basis not to fill a vacancy in
the sense of permanent situation
but to simply allow it because
on extended leave of absence or
somebody's ill if we can cover
that job for a little bit of
time of particular these rural
counties where it that you know
get district judges have you
think about the north is a
judicial district wide goals
always the Colorado border in we
have others go you know what on
the side of the state to have
based the core the geographic
area of the state of New Mexico
or District Court judicial
districts it makes it very
difficult for the district judge
be able to do this we're trying
to put another tool in the tool
chest that will allow people in
the public to have the
opportunity to have their of
actions treated expeditiously.
Again it is a so what Mr
function that also point out
that for example I I practice a
lot of probate when I phoned
District Court I'm given choice
of the judge I can.
The exercise reviews or what
Senator that's sign a rotating
basis and if the course or do a
side of visiting judges for
everybody were disqualify
themselves visiting judge from
who knows where is assigned to
the case so is well we can have
our preferences in these regards
of the presumption under the law
for judges is that we're all
gonna be fair we're all going to
be impartial gonna judicata
cation Fund is based on the
facts.
So I think we're just simply try
to stall particularly Corona
virus to Senate the judge tested
spoke to his issue Elaine about
in communities that are
suffering
of the ladies in the handling of
appropriations sometimes there
are two situation so we would
you know that this is the act
Sir I'm Soto I think there's a
little bit of a section where we
fit in the pecking order I think
we we're not expanding the
jurisdiction then allowed
probably just across the county
line on a temporary basis and
the and I would stand for any of
the questions of the but the
rest of the committee.
If there's no further questions
we stand for additional ones
that there are from the
committee.
Hi.
So I apologize Mr chair you so
the floor yes thank you I was
talking it was muted so
So I I appreciate those those
answer I I still have a little
bit of a concern
where those involved in the case
may not.
Have a say and if if the judge
just is changed or new judges
brought in I know it's probably
not that big of a deal but it's
still kind of a principal of of
voting for.
Your probate and then.
Having that changes should be
left up to
the executor but.
I do really appreciate the
intent here I think there's a
lot of probate judges that would
be able to help out because
their dockets are are small that
rural communities.
that don't have a lot of case
case load so I think this is a
great solution
you know having that the
district courts with corona
virus they're going to be even
more backed up than than they
were before and so I I think any
any weight or workload we take
out the district district courts
now is is a good idea and and
I'll support this moving forward
thank you Mr chair thank you the
committee members on the debate.
One of.
All right well the last effort
at this the the this is actually
a very interesting discussion
that goes back well as I can
remember which is what is the
probate court in the context of
our judiciary in your county
government it's been all
about result issue I think I've
heard various of I say that it's
it's more County government
function rather than a judicial
function as an attorney I I can
understand there can be some
pretty important consequences of
what appropriate court does and
I I think the role of a probate
judge can be very important in
terms of our judicial process.
The the concern that I have
centered on what your bill is
has not been addressed by others
though hello all expand a little
bit.
Nine I do this with respect all
the judges and other officials
but sometimes when you get into
these local government issues
and I've and I've seen this
happen before where there's a
vacancy for a need for
replacement not everybody always
agrees who's going to do that
and this bill as I read it
creates alternatives without
giving a priority or preference
to one alternative one over the
other so for example in certain
circumstances the judge is going
to be needing to be replaced
thanks the designation of
himself or herself the judge
those.
In other cases it appears that
there's room for the county
commission to make that decision
in some cases
it is unclear which of those
alternatives and it seems to be
the way this is worded seems to
depend some cases on the reason
why the judge may be gone so for
example when it says they're
anticipating an extended
absence.
The judge of the probate judge
may designate is made as a
district judge for visiting
probate judge so that would
suggest that the probate judge
was on an extended absence
because the side.
but then what but then it
confuses of the one that probate
judges incapacitated or a absent
or fails to designate the board
of the county commissioners
show that determines who that
may be.
I really want to avoid
situations where county
commissioners don't agree with
their probate judge and I know
that may be hard for folks to
magic happens I've been around
this to all we're sometimes a
county commissioners and the for
the
Other elected officials the
assessor the treasurer of the
clerk.
Sometimes not always and see
things eye to eye and so I'm
because that's where the bill
right now because I think that
creates of attention that some
results that may never happen
but I but I could see it happen
with the county commission wants
to do one thing the judge must
do something different and and
the bill would not.
provided a way to resolve that
and so that is that's my concern
no different than the others
expressed I think I think that
Senator Ivey Soto Mexico point I
I would I would encourage you
the senator to figure out where
the judiciary is on this and
again we are the Judiciary
Committee our job is to.
Trying to ensure that this court
functions within the big network
the big picture here too and we
didn't have the chief justice
here today I I mentioned earlier
for those of you to join late he
had a personal commitment that
came up suddenly so we're we're
sorry not to have a delay but it
would've been great to have them
for this discussion as well
today too but in his absence and
in the absence of any guidance
from the court at this record
level.
I I don't have some unresolved
concerns with passing this bill
those are my issues I believe
we're ready for a vote I don't
see anyone else us we recognize
Senator Baca.
Sir about the readiness.
Thank you Mr chairman the hello
Jesus presenting in another
committee so I missed much of
the debate so what if I'm
repetitive.
I'm sorry I have a question on
page three Sir one of the
fastest already but what is an
equivalent governor and
governing body.
If a different form of county
governments is is in place Mr
chair and senator.
What is that a what what are we
contemplating in that sentence.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Baca
I administer for to add judge
Wesley if he's on.
Yes.
Mr chair Senator Baca.
Los Alamos County has a combined
city county government.
Consider a.
What what happened there we felt
that we need to be clear that
would cover someone like a.
Los Alamos County at the has the
combined government and
potentially the state of county
cities were to speak about the
future.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
judge of we actually had this
happen in my County we had a a
probate judge
of resigning for Alcee
indiscretions but anyway
what happened in that case was
actually the District Court.
jumped in to fulfill that role I
think it's a good question I
don't know who decided that I
don't know under what authority
they decided that
but what I do know is that
Yeah so then almost seamlessly
but it's a it's a
good question I think this kind
of gives at least some
directions to to where that
decision making from can be made
so I think I think I read it
earlier today I'm disappointed
it didn't get here in time to
hear mostly debate but from what
I can see the looks good I'll be
supporting you today thank you.
And here committee members
questions.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr chair just very quickly our
first of all yes your rights are
judge I think was really
the are with regard to the
magistrates but it does require
judicial orders that Mr what
relation District Court as US
magistrates and and again with
what this problematic for me is
that this did not go through not
through the court Medicaid
process in terms of the
legislation.
Our to to to deal with that and
in.
I frankly the what the examples
that is exactly the issue that
just occurrence was right that
was almost counties that is that
we don't whenever we make
reference to your current
measures we don't thanks for
prevalent this cause was almost
exists that that that's one more
thing that falls outside the
general structure of our staff
is asking our service so as we
all know there is a fact.
I just I just I did I did want
to recognize though that I
misspoke on a much.
No other member for recognition
we were on a two passed motion.
We take role.
Motion is.
Yes.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez now.
Senator Moores.
Yes.
Yes explain my vote.
Senator Stewart no.
Thank you.
Senator want this no the motion
to pass fail Senator Pirtle your
vote.
Thank you Mr chair I I find it
interesting that you know as as
the legislative branch we would
the vote no against the bill
that one other branch didn't
even have the the.
Respect for our branch to come
and speak on it so there's one
to throw that out there that the
judicial branch is always
welcome it's public it's out
twenty four hours before we meet
and if if they respect us the
way we respected them they would
have shown up thank you Mr
chair.
All right
are we ready to go back to
Senate bill ninety two Senator
Lopez or shall we move on to the
Senate bill one ninety one.
Mr chairman I do believe that
there's a an amendment that
could be proposed to see if the
committee would to indulge in
the next matter business all the
Senate bill ninety two will
revisit the matter we began
earlier today Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I appreciate Senator Ivy
Soto is due diligence and
tweaking some of the language
and if I could Senator Ivey Soto
for presenting a proposed
amendment to try and address our
issues thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman serviced
and I actually emailed this
language to
this Garcia I don't know she's
had a chance to pull it up so
that it can be shared on the
screen are if not if misquote
would would.
Authorize me to share my screen
I'll be happy to do that.
that way everybody can see it's.
I'm.
You should have risen to share
screen all fantastic.
that's helpful in this case may
be dangerous overall.
I'm so our.
So I'm really very much
appreciate Senator on do that
again
Finding the to go look at the at
the
Definitions for that article and
and so within that amendment I
think appropriately the way that
we would handle on the issue
that was raised would be on page
two line twelve after the period
and searched.
if the missing person who
request confidentiality
regarding the person's status
location is a person with the
custodian.
Entered by a judge
our with agency shall inform the
corpse that the president has
been found and has requested
confidentiality regarding the
person's status and location.
Yes we work with them the R. the
language on this article not.
People just don't even have a
custodian appointed by a judge
based upon that definition but
if there is somebody with a
customer who has custody
appointed by judge with would
be.
Are considerably in I would
imagine then then the the HSD
what what implement for.
So Mr
General would at this time move
The amendment that is that is on
the show it's great right
Senator Ivey Soto this would be
a so plans maybe prior motion
from them but that would pending
that right that is what.
During the this proposed
amendment committee members
question.
Question one Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman
so.
But we did we vote on the the
rearrangement of the current
bill section see already or does
this take place of any changes
that we made to see.
Mr chairman yes this right is my
understanding that we voted on
the changes to see this is a
separate amendment.
All right thank you.
Members.
I'll review of here I'm not
seeing anyone.
Yes to recognize.
Anyone most.
All right so I just have a
question Senator Ivey Soto
probably for you.
The
So the proposed amendment as I
see that provides for the
beginning of a process or
procedure for the questions okay
then what happens after that and
that was when the when the
person notifies court of this
then what happened.
Mr chairman that would be up to
the judge based on the
particular circumstances of that
situation.
The bill is a really good job
has to do anything right so
we're just specially thank you
gonna tell the judge this is
occurred and then then then
nothing may happen as a result
of that is that true.
Mr chairman that is correct if
if if the court does not believe
the person is in danger I'm not
having a custodian.
then then I would imagine part
would not do anything about it
so thank you very much.
If if on the other hand the
court believes the person are
requires a custodian of some
kind our system previous one was
four point it then the court
would act with the courts
authority in there to reunite
the two or find out why the
person doesn't want.
Other information and maybe then
our in in some cases were
appointed different this time.
But I you know these are these
are delicate matters that that
if a if a person is
Use the terms of the of the
statutes as well as of of
competent decision making
ability or at least legal
decision making ability I think
it's up to them to decide if
they want to be found or not but
the president has if if the
judges appointed custodian with
would seem to be an indication
of the press is not a legal
decision making authority that I
think we need to let the judge
know let the judge take it from
there but I don't think we're
gonna be able to anticipate what
the different situations would
be.
All right.
All the other questions.
Senator Ivey Soto you propose
the amendment Senator Lopez
considers a friendly amendment
saying no there debate or
discussion is there any
objection to adoption of that
amendment.
Will be shown as adopted log
back to the bill as amended.
Committee members Mr chairman
that's an order this time open
enrollment.
You are here are going to.
So Mr chairman I.
One
of the following.
Stupid asking this but I I just
failed to see I feel to see why
the law enforcement involved are
not going to determine this
themselves without us amending
this part of the statute.
Because it it the whole this
whole bill is what law
enforcement does when they have
a missing person.
Issue and everything they have
to go through so I I guess my
question is to Senator Lopez or
her expert if they're still
around
Because it seems to me that
their job is to determine what
the issues are with this missing
person and that the statute
already says that so would not
they the no if the person filing
a missing person missing
persons.
Requests for them would not the
law enforcement already know
with that was the stopper that
was the abuser
I guess I tried to read this
bill thoroughly and I just don't
I don't understand why we need
this.
Thank you very much senator I
could the status would you wish
to answer place.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee
so in this law enforcement
statute law enforcement really
doesn't at information about
whether all doesn't have to get
information about whether that
person is incapacitated this the
statute merely says that they
have to tell a custodian family
member what if that person has
been found
without any kind of status
mental status or whatever that
might be.
Mr chairman
I'm sorry what was your name
again.
When Chavis okay the status so
so on the first page section
eight a section eight says that
law enforcement agency shall
immediately pro request from the
clearing house information
concerning the missing person
that may aid in identifying them
doesn't that clearing house
information have this data about
Issues related to
of people that might be missing
I mean what is that clearing
house.
I would have to look at the
statute but it does lay out
exactly what information one
force meant has to supply.
If you would like me to look at
statute and and I think we've
discussed is enough Act ISIS
still fail to see.
How the a law enforcement would
mess up something like of the
person asking for the missing
person missing person is thought
to be if it's truly someone
dangerous to the missing person
it seems to me they have access
to that information already I
mean it it just seems like this
is implying that the lost law
enforcement agencies are not
doing their job and
I don't know I don't know enough
about it clearly so.
Matt may I answer that.
Thank you Mr Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Stewart.
police may not know anything
about the background of this
anyone can make a missing
persons report in Austin users
will use that to try to find
their victim it's not
necessarily a legal matter that
has happened there may have been
number our master maybe you know
record no history of violence
known to the police it may just
look like a family member in
concerned about a person that
they want to provide that could
be violent could be abusive and
that
does not want to be found
because it's very dangerous.
So I understand that Mister
chairman I'm just concerned that
because it seems to me I don't
know really what this clearing
houses but it seems to me that
at least a fair amount of the
time law enforcement must find
that out otherwise we would be
hearing about this a lot more
than we are that that's what it
seems to me so what you're
saying is that they may not have
the information but many times
don't they have the information.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Stewart most
domestic violence is not
reported to the police
maybe well that the estimates
are forty four percent to fifty
percent of infants are actually
reported to the police of the
please may not now that's
correct
please report to the clearing
house information and so if they
don't have the information
they're not reporting it to the
clearing house.
All right thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Senator remembers.
The pass as men.
What were the motion of the
pastoral open on second.
Your further discussion as
Amanda and this man Mr if I if I
if I just may very quickly with
regard to a Centers for its
questions because I think I
think I think they're really
good questions about about when
we have to tell them not to not
to tell anybody under the
circumstances and and so it's
right my understanding of the of
the of the process that works is
that there is a national
clearing house
for missing persons at under the
on the missing persons
information reporting act that
is housed at the US department
of justice we are we are law
enforcement is expected to
To provide information when they
provide somebody I'm less
accepted by state law and and so
if it's not accepted by state
law then then they have to
report so that the national
clearinghouse in the case and
then and then and then the the
subsection a of that section
them that we have in front of us
provides that of law enforcement
asks the clearinghouse about
somebody and we're gonna get
information back they shall
inform the the need to thousand
number what the study and and so
we we were year between federal
and state law these mandatory
provisions that somebody who
wants to disappear isn't able to
get out back.
Senator all right we're gonna do
pass motion will call please
vote.
No.
Yes.
Thank.
Past sorry I just got back at.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator do.
Yes.
This yes new passed motion.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee so I just may I put
this in senators New if you ever
just pop back in again and you
don't know we're voting on
however Senator Baca votes you
just let the opposite way thanks
for this time.
Very good the last item on our
agenda sent one eighty one I'm
the sponsor of this legislation
let me suggest the committee a
couple of things that you have
selected a meal will chair and
all present I have a we we have
a Monica.
All we who.
Fishy
Good good I'm gonna let her run
the show all members want to
well for more committee staff
I'm looking forward to her
presentation and of of of the
issues although for the
committee will we'll let Mr
chairman we'll do we'll do this
we we may or may not be ready Mr
chairman for a vote on this bill
today but let's see how the
discussion goes all right okay.
Thank you Mr thank you thank you
Sir our chairman so not this did
you want to present your bill
thank you Sir I really like to
have on is all do it but okay in
any about the just very simply
now we have talked about.
The trap that sometimes.
gets placed in front of
individuals who find themselves
kind of in in the end of the
cycle where the fines and fees
and penalties associated with
a criminal offense become the
or one distributes them from
being able to.
Themselves beyond the the
offense itself so it's all all
Turner heard water explained the
legislation is chairman thank
you result.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee as you
know my name is Michael to in
the C. director of.
Center.
And.
And
we work collaboratively with the
sentencing commission on this
particular piece of legislation
so what I'd like to do first is
is actually defer to Mr Douglas
carver I'm so he can set that up
and then I'm happy to stand for
questions and go over a little
bit more in detail the bill.
Sure there's justice around
again Mr chairman I'm gonna ask
of is all in the other
presenters to make sure that
their total presentation is not
exceed ten minutes in
presentation so Mr chairman I
trust you watching the time yes
you will cut us off thank you Mr
sounds good.
Thank thank you Mr chair
Senators about days member of
the members of the committee my
name is Douglas carver deputy
director of the New Mexico
sentencing commission and I will
be quite brief I just wanted to
let the committee be aware of
the genesis of this bill this
bill came out of the reform
committee process of the
sentencing commission that's a
committee that was reform about
a year or two ago to bring
promote justice reform ideas to
the state the bill was
unanimously endorsed by the
reform committee and then went
on to the full sentencing
commission where was again
unanimously endorse and for the
information of members who might
not be familiar with the
sentencing commission the
commission includes a cross
section of actors from the
criminal justice system
including corrections victims
advocates the AG D. A. the
public defender's department of
public safety does appointees
from both chambers in both
parties on the commission as
well and numerous gubernatorial
appointees and the magistrate
judge and the administrative
office of the courts so I'm
probably for about one or two
this twenty seven members in
total on the commission so it's
a broad cross section of all the
various points of view
of the criminal justice system
and all those members endorsed
this bill in full before
introduction.
So thank you Mr.
Thank you Douglas yes I'm
Monica.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Douglas and members of
the committee I'm the thing that
I just want to highlight of
course I've had the opportunity
to present to many of you
through the interim process so
rather than go into that whole
slew of information is that this
particular bill the focus is
really to
It's really to encourage that
the judiciary be funded
appropriately what we know is
that fines and fees are an
extremely inefficient and
unreliable source of government
revenue in particular we found
that New Mexico County spent
forty one cents to collect a
single dollar fine and the
revenue which is essentially a
hundred and fifteen times more
than the IRS spends to collect a
dollar of income tax
and I'd like to highlight that
in our largest county burn a Leo
we actually spend a dollar
seventeen for every dollar of
fines and fees collected meaning
that that counties actually
losing money and I'd like to
also stressed that this figure
only accounts in court and jail
costs if all of the costs were
measured which includes the
sizeable cost to law enforcement
the cost of the NPD for
processing suspended licenses
and the costs to parole and
probation.
The the cost would be much
higher so very briefly I'd like
to just sort of highlight some
of these costs
so.
During the there's a report that
came out at the Brennan center
for justice that looked at three
different states ten counties
three counties in New Mexico and
a look at Bernalillo county
Santa Fe County in Sapporo
County.
And what we found in in one
particular year is that the
Bernalillo county assessor four
point one million dollars in
fines and fees
two point two million of that
was converted to jail and
community service credits I'm
one point nine million was
actually collected.
But collection costs rand two
point one seven eight million so
there was that's the net loss of
three hundred and sixteen
thousand dollars and I'd like to
also stressed that this doesn't
encompass all of the fines and
fees that went uncollected and
although this particular report
noted that it was difficult to
assess all of the uncollected
fines and fees it did no use it
using a complicated metrics that
of the three states that it
looked Act and we are one of
those states the that.
Between the dates of two
thousand twelve and two thousand
eighteen the three states
amassed one point nine billion
in in I'm rate and I'm
collecting screens in fees so we
know that there's a lot of
entities that are assessed on
very little are collected and
Of those that are collected so
much of Madam work actually
converted to jail community
service credits so this costs
the system a lot of money.
And what we try to do is
sometimes a different government
agencies actually try to budget
for these are use these
projected fines and fees to fund
certain government programs and
what we know is that those
government programs lose when
that's went when we budget
things in such a way
so I I could go into Santa Fe
counties or county but I think
it may be better to stand for
questions as many of you already
heard a lot of the research that
we went into during the interim
process.
I thank you Monica thank you
and representative someone just
to do want to say add anything
before we go to the committee.
Senator.
Chair.
Okay I'm sorry about that yeah
yes Mister what we'll take
questions so okay all right
thank you senator Senator Ivey
Soto.
Your thank you very much Mr
chairman.
I'm just a couple questions a
couple suggestions the first
question is no on page three
line six on page five line one
more one more time please enter
page three one sex.
As well as page from one in both
places where prior to the
minimum wage our the bell
strikes Federal includes state
county municipal I understand
why you would include state
county municipal.
but even though the minimum wage
is provided for in and state law
of the funds were to do a
higher.
Never wage and we're not yet had
a chance to expect to change our
statutes than than the that
higher minimum wage would not be
recognized.
And and so this is to me that
that that the word our federal
should remain in both of those
locations are and the
I was when right Mr chairman Mr
chair result Mr Mr harbor are
your your your thoughts on that.
Also center you're proposing to
keep in the federal but also.
Add this state county municipal
and whichever would be the
highest what what that is
correct yes Sir I would consider
that to be from the.
Okay well let me just
proficiency then I just go ahead
and make that as a motion right
now assistance from.
Yes do we have a second on the
motion for this amendment.
Etcetera etcetera Ivy Soto
Would you restrict weapons Mr
chairman I'm sorry service sort
of the that you're I to
locations Page three line
legislation and I run one will
places where that insistent
that.
Motion.
And I think Mr cover my to pick
the third the third place
actually Mr chair Senator Ivey
said I believe it's eight six
nine one.
Okay okay thank you very much
six one one.
Yes one six seven six nine one.
Thank you.
Senator can you restate the
motion.
Restore what federal and insert
a comma okay thank you.
And also second that motion.
This anybody have a disagreement
with this motion.
Senator Baca.
Did you want to speak on this
motion.
So this register your as
discrete okay so the motion
Centerville put me down as a no
also okay.
Mr chair.
Me as well okay so we have our
three knows on the motion.
Senator Moores and Senator Baca
but the motion the amendment
does Kerry so you have an
amended bill Senator chair.
And then the next question is I
do not and I do believe that
this.
This may also them great page
six line one.
We have a quick so it says a and
e's sermons one.
And I appreciate the work that
you're doing on this I I don't
think you would find out so I'm
we're.
There are.
In in jail.
By this statute as it currently
exists we part of the amendment
with.
Basically an eight hour day.
Are at the minimum wage
regardless of how much they
normally earn
they get to work on plans and
fees.
Are at an eight hour day
requirements while they're in
jail.
The problems are in jail for
twenty four hours a day.
And and the problem is they're
working on plans and PED's that
generally to the states.
But possible in general is born
on a County.
So you've got what it terms of
paying for the housing.
And another person.
Whose is worth the money.
But but the point is not to
general education together and
and and it seems to be a moment
while I appreciate.
Jan sixteen if it's the person
is in jail for twenty four hours
they should get twenty four
spent on this issue not sixty.
the they are
It is it is.
Are no fun I'm told by those who
have been there being in jail.
I'm fortunate every time I've
gone into a jail it is not been
ranked as a jumpsuit and they
graciously allowed me to leave
what I'm asked to our and I'm
always kind of worried about
what would happen if they didn't
but
but it it just seems to me that
if if you're being confined to
fear being separated from
everybody else and everything
else as a result and and that
and that that time is being
credited that time includes all
the time that you're in jail.
Our and and so Mr chairman I
would I would move that we
strike the word sixteen our and
insert the work twenty four.
Senator chair Toronto this is
that a friendly amendment.
Six one one sixteen twenty four
yes.
Okay.
Yes okay so is there discussion
on the amendment.
Seeing none.
Is there any opposition to the
adoption of this amendment.
Mr chairman and members if I may
just.
My and that is very much a
friendly amendment there would
need to be another amendment
made to
another provision which refers
to and it's on page four of the
bill
And is.
Line two which would say
These are costs at twice the
rate of the prevailing state
county or municipal hourly
minimum wage and I also to to
Senator Ivey so those first
point federal would be needed to
add here as well
but also we would need to make
sure.
Because it starts and I'm so
sorry
thank you everybody for your
patience on page three line
twenty five it starts unexpended
was ordered.
To a period of confinement under
this subsection shall receive
credit for the provide these are
costs at twice the rate of the
prevailing will we'll need to
make sure that we make that
amendment in order to I'm taking
account the twenty four hours
rather than the double because
those two provisions were at.
They they make sense before but
now that when if we made the
twenty four hour.
amendment.
Senator Ivey Soto.
France so we can finish where we
are page six I think we can
address the issues on pages on a
pay for after that okay.
So let's go with page six is
there any opposition to page six
suggestions.
Six nine yes I Senator Baca and
Senator Moores also no okay
center per are your test.
Okay is not there so we are
Senator Baca and senator Morris
no on that amendment on page six
and continuing Senator Ivy Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
so
I think actually we would need
to.
Our.
If you're gonna do that it's
there are on page looking on
page four.
Is the first is that it should
be on the online three after the
prevailing insert federal
comment.
And.
But.
And then on page three line to.
Our strike.
Weiss and insert the words
twenty four and then on page
three line Ferrary just before
the comma.
Would be to in search.
The world's our each day what
portion of a day of
incarceration.
And that would actually make it
parallel to the language down
below and and inconsistent.
I see Monica nodding your head
and test so so
So can we
Is there any opposition to the
changes that Senator Ivey Soto
suggesting Senator chair
surround is a service of
friendly.
Any
That we have clarity on this
there's opposition from Baca
most important okay.
And family and that so do you
have are you tracking with all
of this.
I assume yes if you don't if you
say if I don't hear from you
it's a test.
Okay.
I need clarification on page
four line I.
This.
What is your question I didn't
get that.
Okay Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yeah so I'm
not actually
I believe that would be actually
paid for one for.
We have to the right I just
before the period.
And it would be inserting.
for each day.
Question of the day.
Of incarceration.
I thank you.
Thank you.
Okay and then this summer my
that my last question actually
is on page thirteen and I and I
just have a quick question about
that.
And then I do have a policy
concerned and want to raise and
currently is going to in
response to that is on page
thirteen
We actually it's really on page
I think Representative team yeah
we're we talk about indigents C.
begin online three and then you
ask you have several.
Our yes six criteria and and I'm
wondering how closely there's
practice expected area match the
criteria for eligibility for
public defender representation.
The nexus between the two.
Chair Monica.
Mr chairman and senators that
particular provision it is and
that would be the provision
applying Agency standard it to
fees and a traffic context
and this particular language was
taken from it's in the are of
another statute the while the
public defender's not present to
to explain their standard I will
do my best which is that they
use the of the federal poverty
standard
and they of the many things that
they request for people to turn
into a show that date that you
do in fact qualify for public
defenders some of those are
You know Tanith the general
assistance of food stamps so so
they're pretty related but
slightly different I believe the
public defender often ask for a
little bit more information but
this we just have to do with
traffic that particular
provision so then if I may
Mister chairman Mr chair and
result what statute did you pull
for this for.
Mr chair and senator I ate I
have that I'm gonna have to pull
it up but I'm happy if you give
me a second I'll pull it out
that was actually it's
completely unrelated it's for
the
it's the same standard as you
this is for people to apply for
a fee waiver for the interlock
so this is something we're
vehicle division are ready I'm
is used to dealing with and they
have a rules that accompany it
but I can get you the statute in
just one second probably would
be six to six eight one eleven.
Well one point one
if I remember correctly but why
you're looking for that more
then my last question is.
The section where you have.
President Truman to be a needy
person under the indigent
defense act and I was looking
for the definition of a needy
person.
certainly I know I have my
definition of what in the person
is.
And also Mr Connor could you
explain what a needy person as
under the context of the injured
person act or actually miss all
may have both answers all right.
Chair Senators and Mr cover I
have it well I I can answer this
question and then I'll get back
to the the statute for the motor
vehicle division but so I'm sure
the defense of indigents which
is article sixteen so it's under
thirty one dash sixteen dash one
and in particular under the
definitions
and I'm happy to read it so it's
thirty one dash sixteen dashed
to a needy person means a person
who at that time his need is
determined by the court is
unable without undue hardship to
provide for all or part of the
expenses of legal representation
from available present income
and assets.
So that's the definition under
the defensive indigents I'm and
this so that entire that entire
act is is sort of the
codification of the
constitutional right to a public
defender certainly and and
And then some efforts in the
past to combine that act with
the public defender statute our
and that is something that maybe
we should look at some point I'm
certainly happy to.
Listen to the rest of the
discussion I will be quite
candid my sense of this point is
that that last section should be
struck from the bill I think
we've already empowered the
judges to make decisions on this
on these issues and through the
rest of the bill and and don't
need to include that that
provision in there but I'm I'm
rest of the session before I
make a motion thank you senator
so first up I have Senator Baca
on the bill on the amended bill.
Mr chair I'm.
The starting on on page one of
the new language line twenty
through twenty two how do we
envision this Mr chair and
senator how how do we mention
this assessment of a person's
ability to pay any fine how I
mean what if somebody just walks
in Mr chair and senator and says
I can't pay.
You know what's to stop them
from I know I never happens
lying and the Mr chair and
saying that they just can't pay
and how do we determine at that
point whether they can pay or
not.
Well Mister chairman senator
boxer good question I don't
think that languages as Titans I
would want to be I don't know
but it really adds anything to
the bill that proposed language
centric on the judge process
whatever secure may I we're not
I don't know and judge could do
their job without doing
that so are in because of the
ambiguity I don't think that we
would do any harm against not on
purpose the bill I might not
have not requirement but I if
you'll allow your agency cover
result to try to make a pitch
work but but my my this one
clinicians that languages on
that Sir.
I miss all Douglas.
Mr chair I can't so I can tell
my screen whether one echo was
going to respond I'll start a
preliminary answer and then I'm
sure she'll jump in
As I presume it's it's both the
the court assessment of
inability to pay is currently a
fairly standard practice.
In the courts and yes people do
live but I know that
The prosecution is
also allowed to challenge
someone if they pull up in a you
know they seem to be pulled up
in a expensive car and but they
claim that they can't pay there
is an ability to challenge that
and it's a pretty standard
process I was our understanding
what we're informed that the
commission is this is a fairly
routine process I think it is
important to the bill
want to put in statute that the
court needs to make this
assessments
to ensure that there is a
dialogue between the court and
the defendants on whether they
can pay fines and fees and it's
then also linked to any kind of
installment plan that might be
done there's no way to put a
burden on the courts
You know they're not going to be
having higher accountants or
anything like this I just I get
the management of office of the
courts raise no issues but this
so they didn't think this would
be part of some.
And I don't have money I want to
add more Monica did you want to
add anything yes if I may um Mr
chairman and members of the
committee so I'm while the idea
of the ability to pay is a legal
standard and it comes out of the
Supreme Court case in nineteen
eighty three which is geared in
the Georgia which said that the
only way that you could kill
somebody for a failure to pay is
if you first did inability to
pay in query and you found that
there are inability to pay was
willful meaning that they have
the money but they chose not to
pay it.
And what many studies have shown
including the Brennan report
conducted I think over a
thousand hours of court watching
in our state is that an ability
to pay inquiry actually is not
common practice and isn't and
isn't uniformly assessed across
the state I can speak from my
experience being a practicing
criminal defense attorney not in
every jurisdiction of the state
but in a few that this is also
true
this is not something that's
assessed on a regular basis even
though in New Mexico in two
thousand eighteen we created
court rules in it telling the
court that they did in fact need
to do an ability to pay
assessment and my reading of
that is that we felt the need
even though they're Supreme
Court you don't United States
Supreme Court precedent that.
Ability to pay should occur we
felt they needed two thousand
eighteen still that we needed to
have a quorum rule to suggest
that courts actually conduct an
ability to pay but yet we still
have found it this doesn't
really happen so while I
recognize that and and I agree
that a good judge would always
conduct that ability to pay in
my experience it doesn't happen
and the research supports that
thank you thank you Monica thank
thank you yes and Senator Baca
used on the floor.
Thank you just respond briefly
to that you know just a moment
ago Mr Kirk over
with respect to you said that
this created no obligation on
the court and and then I am
hearing agency also exactly the
opposite and and so I I'm I'm a
little bit confused there as to
whether there's an obligation
there to to do this a testament
or whether it's there is no
obligation to do this
assessment.
So I guess or is there not Mr
chair an obligation by the to
make this assessment of ability
to pay and if there if there is
a we sure we want to put that in
there chair savant is did you
have anything on this back and
forth.
RSE recognize but.
I think I think Senator Baca one
thing that I would just tell you
what I'm looking at that I would
see whether really does anything
and I think the only thing that
really actively does that's
which is the last five words
there which is at the time of
sentencing there's an assessment
made so that that has a
substantive implications in may
which is means at the time of
the sentencing itself is when
you make the assessment.
and I think I think putting that
in there the judge you have to
do that the time of sentencing
but in those statutes probably a
good thing for the judge to have
on a checklist of things they
need to do some I've been to Las
sentencing some judges very
thorough job judges go pretty
quick so that's the best way I
can probably answer that you
Senator is that it sounds like
from is all that that there
needs to be in the loop Pan
Alice's and and and we specify
that it happens at the time of
sentencing.
So we judge will be trained and
and recognize gonna do that.
At that point yes the
Senator Ivey Soto on that point
yes my question for this adult
if I may you mention of those
court orders for rural say at
the time seven six.
And Mr chair Senators I would
have to pull it up to see this
as a kind of sensing but I
believe it that's this does it
seems to me that the center
Marcus point is for little taken
that including in the statute
for saying we really need that.
But it's all it's all in
opposition.
Okay thank you thank you adult
arrested you want away and
before we go back to the back
and forth yes Mr chair thank you
just very briefly press at
misspoke Senator Baca
what I meant to say was that
there is yes there is no
obligation on the court
but it would impose a burden on
the court so it's they would
require any extra work or effort
and as you see it's in rural and
so it's something they should be
doing anyway on that point just
very quickly the legislature's
found many times over the years
that for some reason things okay
what what more attention to
things and statutes and court
rules out should be
but it often is how it is thank
you thank you governor some back
to Senator Baca you have the
floor if it's appropriate that
Mr chair I would move to strike
the language on page
looks like page one line twenty
the new language starting at
in the ending online twenty two
with that the period I would
move to strike that language
okay thank you madam chair
savant this is that a friendly
shocked everyone but all I'm
gonna say yes okay okay so
family and Phillip do you have
that amendment.
Okay great so on the on the
amendment that Senator Baca is
is proposing can or can't Emily
can you call the roll yes is to
adopt knows to not adopt.
Yes.
Thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Center on you yes.
Senator want this yes.
Your our amendment is adopted
Senator Baca did you have more.
I'm still in shock.
Mr chairman.
Their motto I don't know why you
would be shocked at all.
Yes this committee is going to
be.
Something we can all be very
proud of his lawyers and
We're gonna do good work and and
I know you're gonna be taxable
thicknesses part again or
whatever else may be that that's
not that many I'm gonna run so
you have a good idea.
Even if it means getting my own
bill.
You know the law I'm gonna be a
good lawyer first.
Survive.
Continue Mr chair okay.
So on page two.
This is the last longer and more
policy so
It's some language in there a
line nineteen and we included
basically under the definition
Mr chair
as community service jobs
grew tenants participation also
service to renew the ability
shin programs
Some of this I I guess I can
understand
like the social service or the
rehabilitation programs
The remainder of what I feel
like because online twenty eight
year explained.
I agree we're actually
increasing the costs at twice
the rate of the preventing wins
so so what I feel like you're is
that what we're authorizing
a education programs essentially
school for for these folks and
then on top of it we're doubling
what the prevailing wage that
they would get credit for is now
obviously they're not getting a
check but you know what let's
face it Mr chair this is
essentially a money for money
exchange you're getting credit
for it so I would say that for
myself I don't have an issue
with the rehabilitation program
but the job screen school
attendance.
Dissipation and social services
I I guess I would have a a new
issue with since those are
really not
but I would think would be
meeting full of is defined in
line sixteen and seventeen
chair on if you'd like chair.
Mr chair center rock are you
proposing to strike the new
language on page two one
nineteen to twenty one I am
proposing a strike of the new
language line nineteen through
twenty one up to rehabilitation
programs.
It seems like that would have
some meaning to it in in my
opinion but the others can be
almost it sounds like going to
college or community college or
pursuing a culinary program or
what have you Mr chair rather
than something that isn't is in
the end eighteen gap what what
we're intending to do here.
Chair before we got a Monica and
Douglas you Mr chairman I was
reject the proposed amendment
initially I when I read through
the bill the first time I had
the same thought Senator they
got that language because these
are really just kind of giving
examples where they're intended
to give Ben strange and I don't
like doing that in statute of
because just as including these
things but but I think as a
policy matter with that it's not
reasonable to expect that an
individual getting further
education or school attendance
can be thought of as a job in
our society as well and and
maybe we need to really be
thinking about that always is is
maybe we need to treat me may
redistribute over a community
college and and other higher
education endeavors as a job on
behalf of the society so I I I
would urged me not to accept
this amendment but I I do
realize that that is
really just kind of an
illustration of what might be
included for for some kind of
credit but I think I think
that's going to have Affleck's.
Senator Baca do you want to
pursue this or will you
surrender.
I'm gonna go ahead and pursue it
and the stock.
Do I guess
and so I would move to strike
on page two line nineteen
beginning with the word
including up to one twenty one
ending with four or.
Okay.
All right Emily you got that.
Yes I do okay so Emily can you
call the role this is a test is
to adopt but Senator Baca
Zimmerman knows to reject it.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator.
No.
Senator about this no.
Great amendment fails Senator
Baca you still have the floor.
Thank you for Mr chair
appreciate the time and
consideration on that last
amendment Mike next comment or
just me as a matter of policy I
think you know what we this is a
second bill would come up like
this I believe the other one was
carried by senator Wirth or flow
majority floor leader and
Like this one better
I think that to reduce the.
These findings and and and
things like that you know just
go back to saying that you know
committing a crime and being
found guilty of that crime is
supposed to be troublesome I I
would think that you know if
being troublesome to pay these
fines in trouble some to
to license reinstated as the
other one said would you know
those are all troubles that are
necessary in our site and their
society in general should
endeavor to to make a make a
trouble so many times you have
are convicted of a certain crime
regardless of many times of of
whether you know you have the
ability to pay at that point in
here was multiplications of.
Credit for money
you know I certainly wish us you
know as in this case somebody
would pay me to go to school
home that didn't happen and so
you know go to jail I can't
support this bill today.
I I do a test of the bringing of
forward and a like I said I
think it's better than the other
one I saw but anyway can support
these types of policies thank
you Mr chair thank you senator I
next I have Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So I learned a new word today I
found this word at least six
times in this bill and I want to
know if it's a legal term it's a
very fun word to learn come to
Matias.
I've never heard of before but I
wish I used it all the time I
was teaching.
To Matias means stubbornly per
verse or rebellious willfully
and obstinately disobedient.
So if you notice through here
that's the adjective they're
using for
these people who are not paying
their fines and their warning us
don't don't think they're con to
Matias unless you basically look
at their income so I guess you
know it it's it's a silly thing
but it's it's a learning as for
me and so is this a legal term
or did they just stick this in
the bill Senator chairman
Senator Stewart first of all.
I'm working for I'm glad you
flag that you're talking about
you're talking existing language
it's not a it's not a legal term
that I'm familiar with from
thirty years of practice but but
I would make the observation
that in your new role as the
president of the Senate you may
be aware that you might get to
use a great deal with your
members.
Okay yeah.
Apple and and they're not on the
other side of the aisle there on
this side of the aisle.
Anyway so it's not legal it's
all it's throughout this bill.
So this is something we used to
use some is falling out of
favor.
Mr chair yes Senator
Senator Stewart was the only one
not feverishly gogo in
consummation is right now to
find out exactly what it meant
so yeah I think you're the only
one who knew that so.
Else in Europe Lee yeah I hear
some of the sentiments contrary
headed faction as refractory
headstrong intractable it's a
good word to know so call.
That's all I have thank you for
the good word to describe most
of us Senator.
For years Senator mourners are
your your little pockets but I
decided I did notice that was
our care definition I'm looking
at.
Those who are one of our agents
are and are.
Thank you.
Senator Stewart if I may in your
role as president and as a
former teacher you know what
used to probably put kids in a
corner album right things on the
chalkboard so I hope you just
put this in a basket someplace
someone somebody this case you
should hasn't arrived essay on
the history and use of the word
confirmations and and ask you
guys to give you five hundred
words on it thank you.
It would all learn something you
know.
Well thank you for that I I just
had a lot of fun looking at that
were just like what what is
that's doing statutes and then
it's for ever so.
Where do you know thank you Mr.
Thank you senator and I had
a Senator doing on the last but
is and she perhaps presenting a
bill right before me and ****.
Probably so and as Senator
Pirtle still years he also left
us for this back.
Okay so okay there you go okay
Senator Ivy Soto did you want to
add anything.
I've got which are just trying
to return to the issue of
section eight of the barrel yes
yes I'm sorry yeah that's fine
you know I do think I do think
we are providing throughout this
bill our discretion for judges
and options for judges on fines
and fees and our and and I and
and so in that regard
right I don't believe.
That that we should.
Our Senator the pharmacies that
that that are
make life significantly more
difficult for people require.
I I I do think that it's it's a
little problematic that.
Our.
That we that we create a system
where where you have a variety
of options brought brought.
You know sometimes right at it's
just
repeats.
I think it's random that
somebody who pays a ticket on
the side of the road page one
cost and another person who
chooses to take the matter to
court and having to pay another
fee the higher the because they
exercise their rights it would
require.
Our our our little for us to
just get rid of the feats but
we're gonna have the fees
everything that I have the fines
and what not them them you know
I think that this is something
that is our
Our.
Where where where through this
program already empowering
judges to have options on how to
manage those only to be
convinced otherwise our center
us around us or or or Mr a
result.
And but but I my tendency is to
this is right.
Okay okay so
Monica and Douglas quickly did
you want to respond to this.
Mr chair point by point or I
have to go so you get to vote
please get to the because I
Or I leave I hear you I don't
want to set of procurement for
sure so Emily did you get that
amendment proposed amendment by
Senator Ivey Soto to strike that
section.
Senator.
Okay so I'm let's call the role
we have an amendment offered by
Senator Ivy Soto our test is yes
for the moment no no is no for
the amendment so Colorado please
Emily Senator Baca.
Yes ma'am but confuse.
No.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
This yes.
Okay well the amendment passes
by my count your so it doesn't
Mr yes.
Term Senator Warsame eighty
Lee no more five more minutes
and more minutes on this bill
yeah and so I wanted to point
that I wanted to give you
respect as the chair of the
Trinity that so you're about to
lose quorum so you really
quickly okay a couple of
amendments amount
okay thank you.
What are rolled from I mean we
are really really matter now I'm
gonna quit Senator okay for okay
Senator Ivey Soto you stomp the
floor.
Thank you okay Senator chair
surrounded.
H. two.
One three three five is a
sentence.
Reads the other person is able
to pay.
The court requires them to do
so.
I don't believe that new
language adds anything to the
law.
Okay.
So.
We would move to strike the okay
does anybody propose our terms
around this proposed amendment
page online again please.
Line three I decided to be
against a person strike the
sentence.
Is there any opposition to that
amendment.
Seeing none of your and that's
adopted next the next amendment.
The same page thanks to my eight
through eleven.
Nothing in this section shall
limit the ability to reduce the
amount my optional additional
payments this is like a no
prepayment penalty clause of a
contract
I don't think that belongs in
the bill either.
That's pretty.
I would think may I see Mr Kirk
maybe trying to disabuse me of
that but that's that's fine all
all all take the experts of
input but but it was pretty self
evident members want to pay
their fine earlier that we
shouldn't be able to tell
Metcalfe right.
Maybe Mr chair Senators very
very quickly that language was
added and the reform committee
process because without that
language people were worried
that are that that what actually
happened so it seems self
evident the some of us in the
number of the attorneys around
that table we're worried that
that language was necessary so
that's why it was put in during
the drafting process I just want
to get back we can but thank you
Douglas on Senators Montez does
that change your opinion is not
the language okay
okay is there any opposition to
sit chair psoriasis amendment.
Seeing none.
is that it chair will serve the
same.
One five the language because
gaining online I reached
installments shall be in thirty
day increments I'm not sure I
understand I offer defer to
Mister Kerr or ms all about what
that means what it says
installments shall be in thirty
day increments I think that
that's ambiguous unless that's
my.
This means something to help
address.
Service.
Really about thirty day
increments isn't.
Mr chair actually I might differ
demonic on this idea is to have
a regulated time because the
courts and the state very widely
as to how often they require
payments is no standard for
payments plans so we're trying
to regulate that and money could
you want to address the specific
language on.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee so the
thirty day increments was needed
because some in in some parts of
the state they would require
full payment in thirty days but
it's common practice for the
courts to have when they do have
a payment plan that it's every
thirty days so it's a monthly
payment so putting into this
into statute gives a lot of
judges the necessary guidance
that they need.
Senator chairman some office.
Well for the other thoughts of
the committee but it just seems
to me like that's kind of a look
then because I think if you just
take up the the show this thirty
day wrists just say installments
or or your each installment
shall not exceed two percent of
self reported monthly income
that does it
okay okay so that's that's the
amendment to the committee any
opposition to that amendment.
I
see none okay.
Is that it.
We will.
The court marijuana rest the
legal you know the bill making
process that's all I have to
show and I think I'm ready for a
new passed motions and then okay
thank you to the committee we
have Senator Stewart I'm a movie
do passed as amended and I
second that emotion
families can you call the roll.
Of this trying to get your oh
I'm sorry just just real quick
are real quick on a page a three
line seven through twelve
after the court to conduct an
additional ability to pay a
testament to really need that
well let's let's a vote on this
amendment person and get to your
your issue okay.
Amendment of the bill with the
with all right I'm sorry I'm
sorry at to your to your to your
amendment Senator Baca my
apologies.
Mr chairman.
Yes our chairman Cervantes
this proposed amendment is
probably okay.
Yes I senator start.
Thank you Mr chairman but so
this is the section where the
court can revive or modify or
reduce or enlarge the
installment and should we we are
required that they do inability
to pay assessment.
Mr chairman Senator of course
but if you look at the languages
court may many times existing
language in any time this is
revise modify enlarge it and the
new language that they survived
because they cannot really
support which just says that the
court to this African that
connects in additional ability
to pay assessment at that I get
that all of us you seem so self
evident maybe recorded any jobs
I I I you came across your job
you know you came and you
haven't yet you can review
boards I I've been changed my
mind I'm James how you have to
tell the court that it has to do
an additional our ability fan
Alice's I think a languages
rebels.
Chairman Mr chair what we're
what we're hearing from the
experts is that some courts and
judges don't do this that's what
I heard from Monica and Douglas
which is why they're committee
their group wanted to ensure
ensure that they would do those
pages.
Me too
Mr chair and senator Storer just
to address your concern if this
makes you feel any better the
assessment that was kept above
the we tried though that was
attempted at amendment
was done at the time of
sentencing so basically this is
after the could.
Conducts an additional ability
to pay assessment conducted an
assessment when they sentence
them so I just I I don't see how
it adds but diet I don't know
maybe if that helps you Mr chair
chair survive this.
I think users a proposed
amendment I would okay.
Okay so is there any opposition
to the proposed amendment by
Senator Baca my show Senator
stored opposing everyone else
agreeing so back on the bill
we're gonna take a roll call on
the passage of this bill.
as Amanda.
Senator Marco sorry Senator Baca
no okay.
Hello yes.
Even though I stating cap quorum
no.
Thank you Stuart.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator on this yes.
And German if I could just just
given the number of amendments
that we maybe once those all get
drafted out
if we could empower the chair of
the committee to decide whether
to do a committee report with
amendments or as a substitute
I'm I'm I lost track of the
world with will be clear but
right chair savant is that how
does that sound
not.
The committee some sounds
because of we'll probably more
ambitious that we need to do
service I appreciated what I'd
like to do it is amendments I
think it's easy enough okay okay
thank you thank you chair so MI
to understand that's it for our
committee today you all enjoy
the Superbowl Senator.
Why are you cut the chair
Senators through races.
Nation Senators current word.
All okay well thank you thanks
everyone and and good job and
we'll see what on Monday no when
see Monday right Monday.
still Buccaneers okay all right
you like Tom Brady yes.
K. five patriots then lived in
Boston for ever ready for a.
Okay each J..
Thank you.
Team and team from not thank you
in the super bowl give worker
one tell you about is politics
so we'll just.
The chiefs and.
Okay all right thank Senator
geishas.
