This is for now that we're yep
will just try to get this
resolved as we get to work on.
I thank you Senator for pointing
out that my microphone was not.
who's joined us on the panel the
starting with early notice
justice Bacon trying to be
respectful and and look at me
while I'm speaking to your first
you're gonna have to get used to
is turning your back to me and
feeling comfortable doing it
In the Senate chamber and the
you're fine facing on that
direction to get started before
we do get started though let me
recognize the fact this is our
sure that I introduce our staff
who were around here wondering
and I'll just tell you those of
you that have been on the
committee most of you now have
for some time we have a
committee staff that we can be
half a dozen of us but the but
the skill and the level of
debate discussion that takes
place in this committees always
so that we can be very proud of
they want to be descriptive.
Philip wants to be described as
the chief of staff and counsel
to the committee you all know
what is real title is and it's
many more things than tiles in
that but he served on the Senate
Judiciary Committee for eleven
probably a twenty year member of
the uniform law commission which
is a great asset for us as well
to see on the Filipino all that
he does for us thanks for the to
my to my right is Emily Garcia
Martinez so we're very proud of
our staff and appreciate
families close attention to
detail I I'm gonna repeat that I
ask them to write it how they
rewriting built during committee
is the the way that somebody
wrote this up for me I can hi I
think it's accurate to.
I know.
Hello that working Senator okay
thank you and then when you turn
welcome Emily back again and
it's she didn't put this down
but this is particularly special
because she's now a grandmother
with.
grandchildren here locally and
Cummings brands over here on my
left serve the committee for
almost a decade it didn't
realize that but that's very
impressive.
His research skills are soon to
proud to say that he's a UNM a
law of soon to be alarm I think
we're very soon to be alone and
also.
California right California.
ultimate idol is back for a
second session with this and has
triggered sprints for us both in
the civil civil and criminal
practice law in the committee
Most of the last week reading if
I understand correctly every
criminal conviction know what
what.
online look up of cases and he's
looking at everyone of these
cases for us so we can begin to
gather some of that data so he's
been very diligent about it and
Martinez is a civil rights and
Grant Committee isn't for she
and the realization as we all do
that the house is a great
stepping stone to the Senate and
so welcome Anna to join us here
Michelle is a new to our
committee as a committee
secretary or or should be mice
Committee secretary this year
apart from Emily and she has a
lifetime experience in the
with Barbie hill and so she has
a lifetime experience with the
judicial branch starting with
the former justice B. hill in
the first district.
the staff in attendance when
we're a little more intimate
setting back in the committee
but that's the that's the line
up in and the you can be.
Very confident you've got some
it all so thank you all right
committee members of there's no
other business in the
organization of the committee
we're going to be that the usual
times.
knows the bills always come to
us as a crash at the end they
start with other committees the
judiciary always ends up with a
number of bills toward the end
so right now we're gonna make
good use of this week to have
look at criminal justice in in
in a broad macro perspective so
we look forward to that and and
I look forward any request for
input for hearings we're gonna
Senate bill two so Senator Wirth
echo co sponsor of the bill will
introduce our presenters on
Senate bill number two.
over to the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court will introduce the
panel that will present on the
bill
in the courts for many many
years and I I just very much
appreciate your efforts
in bringing this legislation
forward.
direct probation again I'm sure
we'll have a discussion about
judicial retirement solvency
this just allows for direct
procreation into both the
judicial and magistrate
retirement funds for direct
appropriations the bill also
increases certain service credit
multipliers provided the just
makes a change to tie the
justice of the justices of the
state Supreme Court to a salary.
Which is equal to the annual
Difference from the current
situation where salaries are
established as a matter of law
which means it goes to the
legislative appropriations
process and then under current
down so essentially what this
bill would provide it would it
would in effect take that
authority away from the
legislature and set the salary
calculations the formula for
magistrates are so again that's
in a sense in essence what this
about the challenge of getting
lawyers to go into the judiciary
at the state level and kind of
the difference between what we
see at the state level and at
the federal level when there's
government I'd be remiss if I
didn't say the legislature's at
less than a half a percent so
again I think that this this
variety of folks that right now
simply are going to give up a
practice to go into
a career on the bench so with
Pleasure to appear before you
here today.
A with me his senior justice
Shannon Bacon she will be
speaking to you about retirement
us also with me today is dean
emeritus offered Matthew sent
from the university of New
Mexico School of Law and in that
commission so he's got some
things to tell us and also
period by zoom is mark Baker a
lawyer in Albuquerque who has
public comment portion of our
presentation.
So thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today.
Provided an overview of the
According to your own judicial
compensation commission.
Is a significant factor having
call these cheat sheets but
there's these.
Of.
Board so that's got some
resentment really this is the
heart of our.
Of.
Justification for our request
first of all.
of fifty one that is the trial
judges
of the of the entire United
States.
Our appellate court judges and
private practice.
According to a study the last
thirty that was done isn't two
thousand seventeen.
A law firm partner.
themselves was making about one
hundred and eighty four thousand
four hundred and fifty seven
dollars.
For a law firm partner that's
twenty seven percent more than
more than the justice of the
Supreme Court.
And I I would again say the.
Remind you that that's a gap
that existed as of two thousand
senior level state and local
government employees.
For example the Bernalillo
county attorney is paid two
hundred and sixty three thousand
Danyang county managers a
hundred and eighty five thousand
dollars and there are other
discrepancies that I need to get
into.
Forth the pay for judges in New
We're not asking go anywhere
near that the lowest paid judges
in the federal system our United
States magistrate judges and
compensation report also
emphasizes it is critical to
improve judicial salaries now to
address chronic challenges in
Many current and prospective
judges have other career options
and levels of compensation
offered to judicial officers
service with diverse highly
qualified judicial officers and
employees consisting of the best
and brightest in practice now
many in this room are concerned
about healthy economy of New
Mexico.
New Mexico has a strong interest
in attracting and retaining
businesses which generate jobs
appropriately compensated
Judiciary.
Now a lot of people don't know
this but over ninety east seven
percent of all legal cases in
are called upon to resolve
issues I'm highly controversial
matters as school funding health
important to the business
community.
These include economic
development.
Zoning regulations toward and
liability cases contract
Increasing judicial salaries and
improving the quality and
stability of our judiciary makes
business sense.
A growing majority of businesses
now report.
The state's litigation
environment is likely to affect
important business decisions at
their company.
The most common path to District
Court judge of the New Mexico
has been from the criminal side
because we have found as the now
commission frequently finds no
or few applicants for judicial
vacancies.
Having experience in business.
We must be a competitive to
attract applicants from a
successful law practices we're
attorneys handled complex civil
cases and transactions and can
association survey taken a two
thousand seventeen.
On that the average shareholder
partner in a law firm makes
about two hundred ten thousand
dollars and sole practitioners
generally average about a
and fifty three thousand dollars
per year and trial judges earn a
hundred and thirty eight
thousand.
So I asked the question it's
really rhetorical how can we
The solution is clear.
Everyone I've spoken to agrees
that salaries of our judges must
be increased.
sacrifice and those joined the
bench must be ready to forgo the
more lucrative compensation
available in the private sector.
Training and experience.
Now I've spoken to some of you
earlier.
And.
The last one over several years
of judicial compensation
commission reports found over
and over and over again that our
judges in New Mexico were it at
for the bottom of the salary.
one hundred sixty five thousand
dollars.
And
That's the target we we reach
for trial judges at that time.
to look somewhere else where we
look at first column.
Salaries.
And I realize that the but
there's an on vacancy in the
People from all across the state
of New Mexico
I think you're gonna be
astonished to hear how many
actually apply when there is one
vacancy.
percent of what a federal
District Court judge makes in
that right now it's right around
two hundred one thousand
dollars.
So.
It's been this way for many
years.
You are automatically assigned a
U. S. magistrate judge to hear
your civil case.
and immigration cases because
we're a checkerboard state with
all the Indian jurisdiction of
the federal crimes assimilative
Act they have to hear those
cases the only way you can not
I don't know I don't have
statistics but a great deal of
the federal civil litigation in
federal court is handled by
United States magistrate judges.
In the state the justices on the
highest court in the state.
To get paid the same salary as
the lowest paid judges.
The federal system.
million eight nine eight five
one eight.
This but it's hard to hold on
about three point eight three
point nine million dollars so
what we're asking is in addition
to that three million dollars
be allocated for judicial
salaries.
which court of appeals get a
percentage of that.
District judges get a percentage
of that.
magistrate judges do not.
So that's our number one
priority.
Our number two priority is
retirement which Justice bacon
will speak to you about in a
moment.
Shocked to find.
That.
Our workers in the judiciary
So we're asking.
This year The appropriation be
made to get the judicial line
You raise the session we need to
give that as well to the
judicial employees so that
they're finally on par with the
judiciary supports fully as J.
R. eight which is a
constitutional amendment to
provide for an independent
commission in this case it would
be the ethics commission.
Being affected.
And this would.
Allowing judicial salaries
moving forward to ensure that
salaries are competitive.
judicial independence it is
important that judges be
compensated for their work in a
way that is commensurate with
the role and years of experience
in the legal system.
Mid level experienced attorneys
who have been practicing for
some time we're not getting
we're not trying to get young
lawyers freshly out of law
school these are folks that have
get have a basis for them to get
that job aside from just plain
public service the cost too much
to them and their families the
ask Miss Matthews.
Yes if you could please share
your experiences with the
members of the committee.
I can see what.
An active but I can't see what I
wrote.
So.
here and then nearly forty year
career.
As a professor.
Dean now former day this is the
first time I've ever testify.
Of the four New Mexico
If I would do it and the second
being the importance of this
issue.
I am a corporate law professor.
And.
At all levels of the judiciary
across the state.
I also chaired the judicial
compensation commission and it
impact.
No additions in terms of dealing
with judges who have experience
with civil commercial and
corporate law practice.
but we also need applicants.
And so it was a time consuming
process of trying to find
received often times we said the
the constitution has minimum
years of experience at the at
this level and at the District
primarily came out of government
service prosecutors defense
attorneys.
And we did not see a lot of
started teaching at the law
school.
Out that your students come to
law school because they want to
board members.
And if you want lawyers.
numbers and complexity.
And so having lawyers who have
experience.
currencies.
Big call center.
Interest rate swaps certified
community development financial
that experience.
And what.
We see is that the compensation
a little more something
incremental and and I can then
Chief Justice the hill and and
the present court.
For looking not as an
incremental issue but this is a
also consumers of having judges
who have the knowledge and
experience to deal with these
cases no we compensate lawyers
We had we educate and train
lawyers the and then you can
look at state agencies a loss in
the state agents we compensate
them.
what we're saying to the people
of the state is we're just not
going to give you the same.
You look in terms path for we're
not going to pay
do something about it we need to
do something about now and just
me and my
Once the retirement.
I wind up coming to a few.
In situations like this but this
is really important.
And I chambers of the Chief
Justice S. but this is a very
That that's something that I
fully support your review do so.
Thank you dean.
No I would like to point out
some well.
to speak to the legislature
about this.
It's not about the judge the
individual judges it's not about
Mexico so we're.
The reason I made this the
number one priority for the
judiciary as I said it's time to
fix this it's time to fix it now
that dovetails in with just to
speak and presentation on
retirement so I'll turn it over
to her thank you.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
one is a solvency it topic and
one is a recruitment topic that
dove tails back into the what
the Chief Justice has been
talking about in terms of
I'm in Senate bill two you will
find in section six and seven
to mentions of an appropriation
solvency of the state retirement
funds over the last several
years we've not focused on with
that kind of full throated
Solvency of those two funds it
is
incredibly questionable.
actuaries people who are much
smarter than I am think about
solvency and retirement.
Currently the judicial
Which has gone down since last
year.
I'm it moved backwards by point
to percent from FY twenty.
Point seven percent.
From last year says seven
tenths.
So what what can be done about
it this year.
What can be done is one time and
have proposed in Senate bill two
that the legislature invested
thirty five million dollars one
time money to bring the J. R. A.
dollars to bring the magistrate
fund to solvency.
With that investment thirty five
million dollars to the J. R. A.
With the investment of one time
money.
put into the J. R. into the MRA.
We can stop having a
conversation about the concerns
So that is that's the solvency a
portion of the Senate bill two
again found in section six and
seven.
This body can do the one time
infusion of money to the fund
and bring it solvent the changes
to the service credit which I
minute talk about is a rich
little more detail as I move on.
So when we talk about
recruitment of judges.
to become judges or justices I
think it is one of the it's
certainly the best job I've ever
had it's also the hardest job
I've ever had.
So some details about where we
are now in terms of service
credit and recruitment if
with us pension that is seventy
five percent of their salary.
I emphasize this twenty three
years because there are many
service where you can start your
public service for state county
government at the age of
eighteen or twenty two.
You have to be a minimum of
pointed out recruit people who
have experience in their
practice before they apply you
want people in that fifty if
range.
Until you're seventy three years
old.
So we're asking a lot of the
current judges people who are
applying now in terms of their
terms of service.
Judges in New Mexico.
Okay into the pension fund at
the foot fourth highest rate in
the country.
paying more into the retirement
funds than any other sector in
stay in state government.
And we also have one of the
lowest pension rates in the
So what we are asking through
Senate bill two and this
language can be found at section
two B. and C. in section four be
called service credit.
more recent members of the
judiciary and folks who will
hopefully join us in in the near
future.
So again as I said the service
credit currently is twenty three
service credit in in two ways.
For service on or after July
first of this year.
We would ask for a four percent
five percent per year and this
would allow the traditional
retirement at twenty years
rather than twenty three years
at seventy five percent right
years of service is also to
create
and a second path to retirement
for those who are a little
little longer in the tooth when
salary so would allow somebody
to come in with years of
experience applied their their
craft in their trade to the
judiciary and still reap
focusing on for the judicial
retirements of the the lawyer
judges in in the state of New
Mexico we're also looking to
credit at three percent per year
which provides a seventy five
percent pension or retirement
after twenty five years of
service.
magistrate judges to retire at
twenty one point four years
rather than twenty five years
and we think both of those
pieces are critical for
recruitment of applicants to
I want to go back to what we're
I started out when I started
talking about the term of
service.
These changes of the service
time funding to bring those two
retirements to solvency.
If those funds are not put in
service credit change as being
tethered to the one time
infusion of funds to the to
retirement plans currently LFC
million dollars so as you can
see simple math I am capable of
simple simple math.
we needed additional twenty five
to solvency allows us to modify
the service credit to better
entice individuals who are in
private practice to applying to
become judges and and serving
talk that much more much more
granular level about retirement
questions which is fortunate for
me but with that Mr chair I will
that concludes our presentation
except for Mister Baker who
will.
You're in the public comment.
he's on the zoom.
And
Of the institution.
Very much.
Thanks.
I appreciate the fact that this
the P. R. A. here today to
answer any questions you may
have so thank you thank you for
coming.
of for the help of for modified
Committee process here using
zoom we can not perhaps have
those individuals are on zoom
wish to be identified to speak
let me recognize the Mr Baker
for a three minute said to add
to the presentation I hope
that's adequate time Mr Baker.
You'll be admitted into the zoom
I will be very brief and I think
the only pieces to the puzzle
that I can add.
Is some background on what we've
seen with the federal magistrate
when that process opens up it's
typical to receive as many as I
went back to the numbers eighty
the typical pool of applicants
additionally would include
more than twenty four and
sometimes quite a bit more than
and that that was the lowest
noted for magistrate judge puts
it at a little over two hundred
thousand dollars
when they retire it's after
fourteen years of service and
when they reach sixty five years
note is
with the federal magistrate
judges their their
responsibilities are different
than and general jurisdiction
docket for state judges they
zero law clerks or maybe one
staff attorney here Google staff
attorneys within four house it
are shared among all the judges
where the judge.
for the court to do and those
types of proceedings can slow
things down and so I'm certainly
not here to say that a federal
magistrate judges job is easier
job.
Other than that I can find
Answers to questions that may
crop up if anybody has any but I
think that's probably the.
Members the committee I think
that's probably appropriate time
I don't know that we have
anybody else who's signed in
requests to speak the all this
the next day or two this is
designed to have people sign in
who wish to participate in the
committee hearing by zoom in and
so that we can have an order of
sequencing and admit you in a
set up to the have your
testimony here on the floor but
I think there's a way to do that
let me let me keep working on
that but for now we'll go to the
committee members with questions
Mr chairman that's that's
correct.
So for a little perspective.
Members the committee and the
to judge bar this morning who
retired after about ten years on
the bench a little bit less and
she came of the bench with more
than twenty years of practice
it's I thank you for this
morning when her vacancy she
presented to the commission last
week.
One of them was recommended the
governor.
As qualified for the position
and recommended by that group
eighty four applicants of I
think that tells the tale in a
good way members the committee
with questions.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The great presentation I I was
lucky enough to talk to our
Chief Justice before the session
percent was the highest paid
anyone contributed teachers have
been contributing ten point
seven for a couple of decades
because these funds are not so
I.
Not just yours but several
others so this is happened to a
vacancies are still have to pay
ten point seven percent.
Of their salary when they come
back to work so
Other committee members
questions.
I should I should have a alerted
our our presenters today is the
deadline at five o'clock today
to submit
their their role in the budget
process.
so I have the center of the year
when we're we're running up the
committee members so ideally
will have a quorum today we can
take action on this bill today
constituents I don't mind saying
but you know when we when we're
faced with bills like this might
might my over riding questions
or where are you with Senate
finance or where are you with
the people with the purse
with the people that have the
purse strings.
Thank you.
Mister chairman Senator o'neill
as I mentioned earlier.
So what we're asking for and
with this bill provides for is
an additional three million
which is the cost to put these
just a salary of two oh one.
We we just it's pretty much the
same presentation we give her
today and I heard very I don't
recall a single negative comment
thank you chief justice and so I
assume this goes after this
committee if it to make it out.
How many referrals do you have
Thank you senator and we're
joined by
Sir do here Sir did you get your
bill heard.
Or I see I think we do.
so any other questions committee
members we're hearing center
bill to we've had the
presentation of the panel
Yes.
The motion is already working
we don't have an effective date
of the bill which are merely
come affected may eighteenth
which would affect the funding
requirements for the bill to as
based on the cost approximately
one point one million dollars
more it became effective on the
south side the middle man I just
that will with think and
implicate the budget and what
the finance chair is going to do
I want to I miss my practice I
go to committee members I just
like to offer a couple of quick
comments those of you that just
ana county last week had a
vacancy with over three
applicants and only one was
presented to the governor's
qualified from the review panel
positions in government.
we talked about the county
manager I think was two hundred
judge on the third chief judge
of the third district right so
we have judges who are leaving
the judiciary from the the chief
position to take positions in
about the fact that most
lawyers.
From my experience live in
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
it's hard to get attorneys and
the rural parts of our state and
out how we do this how do we get
judges into the rural parts of
our state because there's a
requirement we have somebody
there when that's not we're
judges living that's not we're
lawyers were.
rethink the entire way we we
administer justice in the state
with that notion that the judges
may have to B. Google above
right now we have the
opportunity hopefully to attract
the District Court judges in the
federal court the government of
parts of the state so for
example judge Brack and the I
think trying to think the judge
enough to to warrant them
operating their family in their
lives to move to another city
and so those are for you
observations and thoughts we
have a due pass motion before
All other members Senator Lopez
Senator Ivy Soto center Stewart
center Duhig Center o'neill
Senator Vontaze voting
affirmative Senate bill two has
of you that joined us a little
late we only have this one
Senate bill for the committee
right now but we're going to use
our time as we wait for bills to
reach Senate Judiciary to begin
matters that are that are before
us so we're gonna here this
afternoon.
Mr Chairman but I don't have a
pre trial detention yes Mr
yep that's that's a.
What will start will I'm gonna
I'm gonna drop that it's a good
raised the service so your your
term.
it may not be a common I hope
committee members will
appreciate this a change
perhaps.
This session to to do a little
and perhaps the committee
comments work on the building
come back for a vote at a later
date a second date I am that way
my goal is to avoid having to
have the committee re writing
time to hear of the bills that
we need to hear we're going to
try and build more efficient
about.
discouraging a lot of re writing
the committee process itself so
we'll see we'll see if I can
presentation on how we got to
well as J. R. one and the person
most logical to give us that
background and re introduce us
I really appreciate the chance
to just.
Revisit St Senate joint
resolution one from twenty
this senator Sander rue it was a
bipartisan effort
led by the courts and justice
Charlie Daniels
fourteen the really began the
discussion
And a a look into our system of
cash money bail.
It was fun today I actually
whole year with justice Daniels
and it was a joint resolution
that went to the voters and
passed overwhelmingly and I do
think it's important to just
this horrible situation with
dangerous defendants and so I
thought I would just share a
couple of points from the.
senator Sanchez McSorley Senator
Lopez myself Senator pain center
Ryan Senator Griggs and Senator
Rocco
and it was a.
very relevant in kind of putting
this ammendment in context and
explaining why it passed
overwhelmingly by the voters and
why I think the voters
Judges had no authority to deny
release when a defendant was a
known danger to the community we
had a money bail system and
had money could post a bond and
they were out those without
money state in our and in
addition to the dangers
The budget that we're not at all
dangerous.
So we have a system and again I
want to stress there was no
ability to hold a dangerous
bonds at extremely high levels
in effect old someone simply
because they didn't have the
money to post a bond that was
the way they were dealing with
gave prosecutors a tool to hold
dangers defendants when they
could show by clear and
convincing evidence that that
person was dangerous and I want
this letter will confirm that
New Mexico District Attorney
Association did endorse STR
wanted to meeting in October
twenty fifteen the dust of also
status quo is not acceptable and
is dangerous to the citizens of
New Mexico thank you for your
time and attention to this
matter.
So the district attorney's
supported this also
public safety staff.
R. and in a letter that I
happened February eighth twenty
sixteen one very important
change required is for judges to
and revisit what we did why we
did it and why I think we can
all be very proud that we kind
of went through the narrow
Window that that you can buy
created the option the courts
currently have to hold
defendants so again I think it's
very unfair to blame this tool
R. as the reason for.
issues but I do think it's
important for the voters to
understand that we did the right
thing back in twenty sixteen
that's a good summation of of S.
T. R. one and again I think it's
a good way to start this
presentation so thank you for
giving me the chance to present
that.
to vote against that measure it
was wrong.
I come coming from Albuquerque
crime was out of control in
Albuquerque might be safe up in
but the majority one other way
to get rid of him but it's it's
interesting that since that time
Albuquerque has gotten even
worse it might be one thing set
up in the heights of Santa Fe
got to realize that you can sit
there and have economic
conversations we're at a hundred
seventeen murders last year Mr
chairman and it's time that we
realized this was a mistake the
need to stop thinking that just
because of this body made a
decision five years ago we'll
look back to last five years the
anymore because of crime is out
of control and until we realize
we're in our safe neighborhoods
which I live in.
That IT will not go in these
neighborhoods the rest of us
appreciate you recognize me it
will come to the committee will
have a full of debate and I'm
sure they'll be a full
opportunity of for all of us to
express our thoughts of but I I
would share with your point was
one of procedure what we're
legislature did did to you
you'll have a different
perspective I'm sure when the
time comes the what the what
it's been my practice when I
chair committees is often times
perspectives today we're going
to hear from the prosecutors who
were invited we're we're going
to hear from
defense of attorneys public
disabuse us of information or or
maybe have them talking between
the two of them away they may
not otherwise do without the
opportunity but the first thing
month matter on our agenda we're
gonna hear about fifteen or
twenty minutes of their
methodology other process and
procedure I know already and
I've heard from a number of of
out where we made the need to
modify the findings inclusions
if at all.
I will share with all of you
that this last summer I sat on
the courts corrections Justice
report on CYFD your may remember
that spoke a lot about the
staffing and some of the cases
there I had an opportunity to
talk with the the head of LESC
the report is in front of us at
this time but let's let's hear
about the a bit more about the
the process the procedure and
the report you have in front of
and then.
may need to reassess re evaluate
hope they're open to doing so
they provide that necessary and
appropriate further studies so
all right who's first up Mr
Good afternoon committee members
I'm John Courtney and deputy
director of the legislative
finance committee for a oversee
our program evaluation unit with
me is Kelly cars well and Dr
research scientist at the
university of New Mexicos
institute for Social Research
ISR today will be presenting
eighteen looking at the
Bernalillo county criminal
justice system.
where we basically found the
what we term as of an
the presentation from front of
you today is an effort to to
follow up on that report we've
been conducting a progress
and then some specifics on crime
trends and bail reform
to tier point Mr chair you know
we we believe we got it right
the LFC with any issues of
Concerns about data accuracy I I
have read some things in the
press I've reached out to some
parties asking them to to
information and and and get that
information right of with that
Mr child I'll turn over the
Kelly cars will to kick us off.
take you through some analysis
of how pre trial releases
currently working in Bernalillo
county as well as the potential
impacts of reforms you may
the crime memo that's been
mentioned that's because we did
not have this new bill at the
time we put this memo out and we
also didn't have data specific
to the population that would be
version of that analysis to
today I'll do that at the end of
the presentation and for now
I'll hand it to Ryan.
Thanks Kelly.
involved multiple agencies.
The figure displays a simplified
version of how the typical
felony case might flow through
the justice system from arrest
considers considering focuses
on.
Slide three please.
First I want to highly trends in
Well here we find it's actually
a bit of a mixed bag.
Property crime rates have
dropped in is approaching the
national average.
As you can see by the orange
twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty as you can see in the top
blue line.
Slide four please.
twenty sixteen when LFC last
reported on statewide crime
trends.
In many of those communities
violent crime rates exceeded the
national average.
in twenty years and twenty
seventeen even as property crime
fell in reached one of its
lowest levels over the same time
period.
Violent crime rates remain well
above national averages.
Slide six please.
Albuquerque N. during the Q.
rise in homicides and twenty
LOC analysis of twenty twenty
one EPD data found that guns
were involved in seventy nine
percent of homicides slightly
Robbery playing a significant
role in worsening drug problems.
Next slide please.
So how's the system been
homelessness income inequality
drug use in gun use all
worsened.
A social conditions deteriorated
causes of crime are key to
public safety.
Research shows that certain that
certainty being part is a more
powerful deterrent to crime than
severity of punishment.
However the LFC found that
arrests indictments and
convictions and Bernalillo
county all declined all crimes
and recidivism increased.
Neither rest nor convictions
have tracked with fluctuations
in felony crime and twenty
twenty one felonies begins to
rise accountability for those
crimes fell.
Presented missions have also not
tracked with crime.
In FY twenty there were only
three hundred and seventy seven
present emissions from the
second judicial district.
especially if it's through the
use of effective diversion
programs however diversion
programs do not appear to be
what's driving these trends.
Next slide please.
So what about violent crime well
we find that arrests and
rises in homicides is of course
an important public concern.
Similar to the trend we saw on
the previous slide there's a
widening accountability gap for
the most serious offenses.
the committee were now on slide
ten.
Okay so we're gonna shift the
discussion now to bill reform
and I just wanted to start that
out by saying that it is one of
least factors in the arrest and
conviction trends that we've
noted.
Our next slide please.
Senator Stewart spoke to this a
first one is that cash bail was
inherently flawed because it
made punishment prior to
conviction connected to wealth
and bonds did not press provide
effective public safety
defendants do not commit new
crimes while in pre trial
release
as it's been mentioned in two
thousand sixteen New Mexico
joined a growing national
pending trial.
The next slide please.
This is outlining for you how
that process works now so anyone
and convincing evidence that the
defendant is dangerous and and
that no conditions of release
can ensure the safety of the
community or any individual.
I also wanted to point out here
that generally speaking pre
trials systems are risk
management systems they have to
system you can never totally
eliminate risk instead the legal
system and society at large
except some level of risk as the
cost of liberty and again the
for different people.
I next slide please.
Okay I also wanted to note that
New Mexico has been in the
the implementation of the public
safety assessment often called
the PSA and this is an empirical
risk assessment tool judges use
in their decisions about whether
in three categories failure to
appear in court the rescue that
they will commit new criminal
activity you on pre trial
release and the risk that they
Next slide please.
Okay so what do we know about
how the new pre trial system is
PSA assesses so those are the
rate of arrests for New violent
charges among the pre trial
population.
The right of arrest for new
period produce the results that
you can see on the slide.
They found that ninety five
percent of defendants on
pretrial release over the four
Next slide please.
This site is giving a little bit
more detail on the types of new
charges the pre trial defendants
were arrested on the most common
rare as they are generally and
if they each represented one
percent or less of the new
criminal activity.
These defendants were charged
with seven homicides that
prevented any of these
homicides.
Next slide please.
So the question legislators will
be asked to consider with any
to answer that question for you
either but just to provide you
with data to inform your own
decision making.
What we've tried to look at is
okay so I'm going to shift now
to the analysis we currently
have on the potential impact of
HB five a bill that has been
I wanted to start out the by
framing this discussion with
some top line takeaways the big
one is that increased attention
involves trade offs so there are
costs and their budget and
realize that benefit you likely
need to detain a significant
number of people who would not
have been rearrested while
awaiting trial and you'll likely
detained some people who won't
ultimately be convicted.
more marginal due to increased
recidivism this last point has
to do with the current injenica
fact of incarceration.
Next slide please.
approaches to rebuttable
presumptions the so the first
one was on H. B. eighty a bill
from twenty twenty one that's
what appears in our crime memo
So the important difference as
you can see on the slide.
is in the number of homicides we
identified in each population
just are provided on that
specific populations and it
showed that none of the seven
homicides pre trial defendants
were arrested for occurred in
the population the bill
targeted.
would target it's the same real
world outcomes data but again
for a different population it
shows that two of the seven
homicides pre trial defendants
were arrested for over four
reflects some potential impact
on homicide.
I also want to explain that the
difference is here do not mean
that H. B. eighty never would
that's because it remains true
the risk of rare crime such as
homicide is difficult to
reliably predict.
Next slide please.
accused of certain certain
violent offenses certain
firearms offenses and defendants
previously convicted of certain
violent offenses who pick up new
should be detained to the
defense to prove they should not
be detained and this chart gives
you an overview of the pre trial
population the bill would and
wouldn't apply to and their
activity in each population and
the blue is the number of
defendants who did not pick up
any new charges on pre trial
release
realize the font is a little
Okay so here we've come up with
some estimates these are high
level estimates of the potential
year.
All other important metrics I
want to point out.
Eighty five percent of those
detained would likely not be re
arrested if released pre trial
Next slide please.
Okay so this is showing you our
So we've highlighted some crimes
of particular interest as well
as total crime at the bottom
which for the state as a whole
you can see is estimated at a
different defendants to provide
each crime.
Next slide please.
okay so this is telling you a
little bit about.
population impacted by only
subsection a of HB five over a
four year period that's because
this is the only section of the
motions will be granted again
the goal of this assumption is
to get a top line estimate in
all likelihood judges won't
grant every single month every
of defendants in the impacted
population expected to be
detained.
Next slide please.
So on one side additional costs
to defendants their families and
the economy from detaining those
would not refund on pre trial
release or for never convicted a
intangible cost to victims of
these crimes or the value of
lost life are not included in
LFC is fiscal estimates but are
of course significant the
today but we will be here for
questions.
Very good thank you and I I do
appreciate your two things one
us for the remainder of the
presentation in which I think
will also be useful so let's the
on Feb going too many questions
let's go to the perspective from
were a for the presentations
will two items of this panel is
wrapping up.
I did not have anything to add
to this presentation okay thank
you for being here the doctor
you're.
Good afternoon.
we have about twenty minutes to
set aside for you all to.
October about the LFC report as
well as pre trial detention from
Thank you Mr chairman and I want
to thank you and members of the
committee for affording us this
opportunity before I begin I
want to make sure that all
would ask committee staff to
share I apologize that we don't
have the ability to of find a
power point presentation but the
but before I do that.
I want to think of the the
Senate Majority Leader for his
brief overview of the history of
that are interested in of a full
accounting of the impacts on the
community to also make an
opportunity available for
victims of crime to testify and
have a sort of a full accounting
of what the impact that it's had
through in my community.
People like Angela Leri who's in
the gallery today who is whose
directly from her
I will make a few points at the
outset that I think really need
to be examined in in careful
I am someone who supported the
bill amendment
back in twenty sixteen and I was
actually present at a chamber of
model this system over on the
nineteen eighty four bill Reform
Act he said repeatedly I believe
he said in this legislative body
and publicly that the for the
for since nineteen eighty four
and that he considered it a
valuable model one of the things
that I would caution members of
the body to consider is that one
courts.
Is the use of rebuttable
presumption for a limited
category of high impact
dangerous offenders there is a
substantial body of case law
that I will note at the outset
has been adopted and propose in
jurisdictions across the country
including jurisdictions that
have engaged and bail reform.
think one of the things that is
largely missing from the LFC is
analysis that's been presented
led to this accountability gap
has been defined by the LFC and
the story is a relatively
straightforward one.
At every step over the last
undermine our ability to protect
the community.
We urge to and argued against
the creation of a revolving door
for violent repeat offenders and
this state he replied in
Bernalillo county.
That the CMO
which imposes significant
burdens that I know my colleague
doesn't have to indoor and none
That objection was again ignored
and then you know in the sort of
the latest example of things
that were ignored
council was a meeting were and
we were informed by the
judiciary that they intended to
cut our access to the grand jury
by seventy percent.
not have the CMO in place in my
one of my fundamental objections
to the analysis that's been put
forward by the LFC is there is
absolutely no attempt none
hamstrung the work of police and
prosecutors there simply this
declaration that there is a cat
an accountability gap as if
massive changes have not
that has those sanctions that
house that framework you can not
name not only in other counties
in this state you can't name
another county in this country
in bringing us to this point.
That said I also take issue with
the way in which the numbers
were gathered in presented to
attorney's office Bernalillo
county and the dismissal right
and it won't surprise I don't
think many people to learn that
the numbers provided by LFC are
Included in the dismissal right
that have been presented to this
committee and to the public.
Or cases that have been
intentionally dismissed and
court and now the LFC wants you
to believe have been dismissed.
In the declination right we
include referrals to my office
the statute of limitations had
elapsed and that too has been
held against my office and it is
that kind of an attention to
I won't belabor the point I
think if you look at pages three
and four specifically we give
real world examples of
defendants
You know like Geraldine.
We convicted him out of three
out of four of his pending
felony cases.
We can all get in the car and
drive down to the prison and
Dismissed one of his cases.
That's not an honest rendering
of the facts and what it does is
it distracts us from the real
real world examples of
additional of
dismissals in cases that have
died as a result of the case
management order that would not
that's impacted I would ask
every member of the committee to
look at Page ten.
Because you're absolutely right
there has been a collapse
No attempt to talk about the
fact that these decisions were
made over our objections police
and prosecutors time Dale said
Pretrial detention and how it
currently works.
You know what is not included in
the LFC report.
You go at length at great length
in the report to talk about the
fact that we have historically
will will clearance rates and
then in the same report
turnaround state all these
example of somebody who we move
to detain who was put back into
the streets of our community and
placed on GPS monitoring he
failed to appear for his very
first hearing.
His battery went dead.
You know what happened when his
battery went dead no one.
sheriff that says Hey this is a
violent dangerous guy and you
know why that one might find a
matter.
Because he showed up in Sandoval
county and committed an armed
robbery but he didn't stop there
shooting at law enforcement
officials across three counties.
Now let's take a minute and
think about that I just or
I know what he was up to for two
days.
No one here no judge
statistician no bureaucrat no
one can tell you where he was
was staying home and maybe he
was reading a book or committing
committing himself to community
service or maybe as a repeat
violent offender.
We have to have an honest
conversation about what's going
on before I close I would ask
that the that the committee
How many defendants does each
pretrial services officer
supervised.
How often do they confirm their
residents their appointment.
What steps does the court take
to locate defendants who fail to
appear.
To local law enforcement
agencies have sufficient
capacity to apprehend fugitives
sense and whether or not it
works you have to.
Before I handed over to Diana.
I also want to take a moment and
Fourteen this is the risk
assessment tool in action this
is Daniel Espinosa he came into
the system with no violent
criminal history he said he has
tool recommended for this low
and non violent person it's just
to detain him.
Goes on the same day using the
same instrument.
Lunches grow for more than a
the District Court judge to let
him go.
That's the core of the problem.
With that I would invite the
Good afternoon to the chair and
members of the committee I am
dying to lose district attorney
and the fifth district which is
have a city employee and
currently the New Mexico
District Attorney Association
Albuquerque problem we hear that
a lot I'm and it's just not
true.
We can look specifically at the
fifth district and I can tell
you about a case that I did to
with a history of failure to
appear and I'm standing and
violation of his previous
appropriations.
He shot an individual.
every mark that we all believe
pre trial detention should do
you put him on a GPS monitor.
In the fifth district we don't
someone to look for this person
are there no longer other
monitors no longer working
they've cut it off it is days
district where a person was on
probation for child abuse one of
the rebuttable presumptions and
while they were on probation
this throughout every district
throughout the state we have
violent individuals that repeat
crimes.
And individuals that commit
violent crimes against them most
often are released.
I personally have had cases
It is occurring over and over
again it just may not be
covered.
We supported the the
constitutional amendment we're
here telling you that like other
To prove clear and convincing
and so you're going to you may
hear in this spent in the
community that in the media and
and what's proposed in H. re I I
and we're asking committee
members to support this bill
when it comes to your committee
are not started and completed in
one fiscal year and at times the
completion is the next year.
And if we dismiss a case because
resolution that is the most
common thing that occurs in
prosecutors offices because we
see individuals that have
multiple cases open every day
and they don't want to plead to
we believe have looked at may
not have been fully understood
by the analyst at the LFC as to
Noon or the on the whole
following.
Mr chairman and you can hear me
that the host has prevented me
so you can look at my picture if
that's enough for you but if I
can have my video enabled I
would be happy to do that as
well.
could you and Mr bottom is Lowry
have the floor and I will rely
upon you to divide up your time
as you wish to absolutely thank
committee thank you for
including a defense perspective
in today's presentation I am the
appellate defender for the law
offices of the public defender
hearing but I wanted to talk
about some of the underlying
legal and policy issues on
relating to rebuttable
presumptions and then it
federal courts and the
experience they're comparing and
contrasting as well as the can
jail conditions that are very
important part of this
discussion so
Is that the article two section
thirteen language that was
adopted in twenty sixteen
specifically and expressly
places a burden of persuading
dangerous mess up this
particular individual in my view
directly conflicts with the
constitution.
charges alone are not an
indicator of a person's
dangerousness as a general rule
no I'm not naive to the fact
that sometimes the underlying
allegations of a particular
understate the fairy the court
is already able to rely on just
the underlying circumstances of
the crime in order to make that
determination that can be
provide but we don't need to
change the law to permit the
court in appropriate cases to
rely on the charges that is
currently lawful I will mention
degree murder and crimes
carrying a life sentence that's
extremely narrow what we are
have been looking at and talking
about in the in New Mexico for
the session is a much more
defender I have to include a
little bit of an analysis about
what that would even look like
defendants don't have discovery
yet at this the time point in
most part it's my understanding
that at these detention hearings
the defense has access typically
only to the criminal.
Plates.
you to be able to actually
responded to an allegation of
dangerous miss is functionally
really just a challenge we
certainly don't have the
resources to investigate and
hundred and sixty seven thousand
dollars in new recurring costs
every year associated with
preparing those rebuttal cases
but even with the appropriate
are not going to be in a great
position to do that it while
people who might be able to
afford a house private counsel
and a private investigator to
prepare that evidence and
were before the twenty sixteen
amendments where people with
means are more likely to get out
and people without means
some other constitutional
presumed innocent because it's
we all recognize that although
presumed innocent some people
did do what their queue stuff
but many do not or they've done
something less than that
inclusive pre trial detention
approach when our jails are
currently experiencing critical
staffing shortages relying on
care.
that the DA Torah's mentions
that in twenty sixteen one of
the models we look to was the
federal system and that's true
but we didn't follow it exactly
federal approach in that way
meanwhile the federal system
which employs at some narrow set
of presumptively dangerous
crimes for bail determinations
has a very limited presumptive
approach has a mandatory hundred
and eighty days in which to to
try cases so while DA tore as is
other jurisdictions as well so
that's important to keep in mind
but all of that to say that
there's a huge concern about
so while it's easy to focus on
the sort of scary facts of these
underlying charges that the dust
are talking underlying basis
that the dust are talking about
where you know this one person
got out and did this terrible
man who was wrongfully accused
it is now known and who
experienced really.
Atrocious medical
don't lose sight of that so I'm
not a data person I'm not a
numbers person I leave that to
the LFC the I. S. are people and
I'm sure that they have some
thoughts about the concerns
could probably be improved our
pre trial services could
certainly be better funded and
have better training to do a
better job supervising people we
problem it's not the driver of
the crime increase that we've
experienced on and there are
other solutions that are going
to be much more effective in
actually reducing the crime rate
are focusing on the right cases
and I'm not name trying to point
any fingers I'm just saying
there are ways other than
incarcerate everyone while their
pre trial detention practices
now.
Mr chair.
former prosecutor and a former
district judge now at the law
office of the public defender
I'm also the only person who
filed in Bernalillo county since
the since they began January
seventeenth twenty seventeen was
the first time detention motion
that was filed out of metro
court
think that we can actually need
to use the data that the data
says out of you know four
thousand one hundred and seventy
never indicted and some of those
went to the Feds a pretty decent
percentage but not eight hundred
and three of them
the data says that out of twenty
cases where the person played in
a different case where they were
found incompetent where it was
sent to the federal authorities
point three percent ended in a
conviction.
I think that's a very relevant
number to consider when we're
talking about how maybe five
Released without ever getting
convicted
I think that even in twenty
twenty one when you look at
those numbers and I understand
that comment impacted some of
that although a lot of the Kinks
was just under fifty percent
that were granted but of those
five hundred eighty seven that
were granted a hundred and one
of them were not indicted within
filed for detention they argued
successfully for detention and
then ultimately didn't go
forward on the case
you know I think that when you
least do as good of a job as
they can of getting us police
reports I don't want to minimize
the effort that they make to get
us police reports but there's
only so fast you can do that
motions are set I had one that
was sent on Friday where I
didn't have the police reports
until this afternoon when I was
supposed to be here
and so so I think that that's a
look at the facts of the case
beyond the minimal things that
are put in that complaints the
article that Mr Chavez Cook
mention from today is a perfect
example of that where they filed
held for months waiting for that
to happen
I think that talking about CMO
issues is a red herring the
reason why we got into a
so cases were taking for ever I
I you know when I was a
prosecutor doing violent crimes
it would takes seven eight
months to get a final report
from police and people were
sitting in jail that whole time
officers often overcharge crimes
I think that's going to happen
significantly more if we get
presumptions because they're
going to do anything they can to
create probable cause even if
and if the LFC numbers which are
also entirely consistent with
what I found actually
underestimate the number of
people who where presumptions
and you know I I have all sorts
of data regarding what's
happening Bernalillo county and
I'm more than happy to answer
any questions that this
committee might have but I know
Chairman serve on this committee
members I want to thank you for
the opportunity to be here this
afternoon going into the evening
that L. LFC report that.
In my estimation the Berber
barbel presumption of philosophy
individuals and I think any time
you get into this I think.
It sounded like to me from the
the even the prosecutors that
misbehavior but I think the
question the committee need to
be concerned with and with the
the research and I again I'm a
data person I think we need to
individuals who suffered
detention in what is
unfortunately come to pass is
horrendous local detention
about the lack of resources and
monitoring and tracking
individuals that are on pre
trial release and I think that
highlights.
The proposal would seek to
mimic.
Has a very well funded well
designed and
very moment defended steps into
the court room and you've heard
Mister Bonner who's been a judge
and a defender and a prosecutor
talk about this problem as well
but are of when I'm appointed to
be B. under the criminal justice
act to be a public defender in
the federal system I'm given a
report is the detailed it is
extensive and it details.
At the investigation the pre
trial services done between the
tops it has a complete section
and narrative section addressing
that is taken from an interview
that that officer does with it
resources that individual has
and again it's complete
narrative it's not just bullet
points it is a narrative
discussion of those factors
there is another section that
talks about the health of that
that person has unfortunately a
lot of crime.
I believe and I've practiced
disclosed exclusively criminal
defense for the last twenty
years and the Albuquerque metro
area.
need to do a better job about
getting those kinds of substance
abuse programs in place to
mitigate and mollify the the
fax.
attachments including the
charges and the outcomes of this
case.
And then the pre trial officer
doesn't assessment of the two
an assessment of the danger this
individual provides to the
community at a recommendation to
the judge.
And.
And we don't see anything like
there's a whole host of
underlying.
Resource problems that will be
immediately confronting the
from the two public defenders
testified earlier the public
dissent defender system
unfortunately and it was
regrettable is not in a position
Despite the best interest of
every individual and the public
defender's office to meet that
burden I discussed before today
attorneys he should have to
handle the current case load the
public defender is assigned to
handle and that's just
caseload of how an individual
manages effectively that type of
case load and add a preventative
detention.
I go back to look at my notes
and I just heard time and time
again there's not enough
resources to track these
individuals there's not a read
north resources to monitor
there's you know and that's the
heart of the matter I think this
is really a question of where do
We have the luxury of being a
private attorney but none of
those detention motions were
granted and in fact.
Are the prosecutorial agencies
focusing these scant resources
to detain people that really are
innocent and I have a problem
victims of violent crime
testified I think we need to
have the victims of unjust
incarceration testify because
But before I do I just want to
mention in the federal system to
their unique aspects that we
don't have parallels to in state
courts this the federal system
have a job your family can come
visit you can have you know a
day room where you can have
social services and meet with
your children and your family so
you don't lose those ties for
a ripe area the legislature
could explore but we don't have
that in the state system it's
relatively unheard and the
federal system there's also
that in the state system while
I'm sure the court order that to
respond day there's not of
regular.
Platform for that type of
the resources they would take to
implement.
Assumption a rebuttable
presumption system like the one
proposed.
But what I'm really concerned
about is.
blip in the radar but I don't
see that I'm involved in the
class action litigation here in
Albuquerque with the Bernalillo
county metropolitan detention
center and.
throughout the department of
corrections and all local
detention facilities where there
are not enough security officers
available to staff Senator and
There is a murder inside in DC
this is just in October and it
saddens me to say this but it
took.
that would completely unobserved
because there were no staff on
hand monitor the inmates.
And we're we're talking about
Politicians and legislators and
folks that represent the body
public should bear in mind when
we're dealing when we're talking
about what happens with the
criminal justice system as a
presentation we're pretty close
to sure five o'clock so thank
you yeah it is not just security
officers is frankly the lack of
a medical care just doesn't
exist in local detention
a lot of crime that's my
conversation with prosecutors
including the US attorney's
office and local prosecutors and
and last we use our local
addressing the socialists thank.
Thank you Mr Lawrie.
All right let me turn to our
last presentation of the day
grace Phillips general counsel
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's grace
Phillips I'm the general counsel
just provide information to the
committee hopefully you have my
hand out which I'll be referring
to so.
Jails have been the
term responsibility and it cost
counties a whole lot of money to
run jails one out of every three
general fund dollars is devoted
to detention operations on
Mexico county Insurance
Authority covers twenty nine of
the thirty three counties for
law enforcement liability and
the first of Matt her first item
that you see in my packet is a
map.
At the state and that's just to
state therefore juvenile
detention facilities and the
stars on the map show which
county facilities are accredited
that's a program that we're very
proud of and an effort that we
facilities this that this map
also shows you the design bed
capacity for each of the jails
and so we designed bed capacity
how many people you can have in
the jail safely and safely
supervise them and that really
depends on a lot of things first
of all you need some empty beds
we know what the classification
differences are for people who
were there it depends on how
many staff you have for sure you
know because you have to be able
to safely supervise the people
there it even depends on things
of those things really operate
to reduce the number of folks
who can be safely held in a
particular facility.
day snapshot from January sixth
of this year
you know sort of what the
population was on that day how
many people were vaccinated that
important.
The column is the last one which
is the percentage of staff
vacancy.
So if you look at that a little
bit what you'll see is there
over forty percent that that is
really really serious and it's
well it's happened before where
a facility or to is really
understaffed is something that I
believe is unprecedented in New
Mexico and I think it's it's
something very serious that we
should be paying attention to.
that ended this past June
thirtieth and what you see there
is their designed capacity again
that's the bigger number you
never want to get to that
because some of our facilities
house federal detainees and so
we come out we asked them to
break it up you know what how
many county detainees did you
have and how many
revenue and that actually makes
a lot of sense if you see there
are quite a few more folks in
that facility if you count the
federal federal folks.
about if you go all the way to
the bottom of the at the chart
on the last page
you can see again total
corrections and that's it you
know obviously a very big system
but they're there
Well there population on June
consider all of the people who
are coming in and out of county
jails and in twenty twenty one
for that fiscal year was over
sixty eight thousand it's a lot
great majority of people the
last study that we had showed
that about seventy five percent
of the people who were booked in
were released within forty eight
you from an annual perspective
what's been happening with
bookings and what you can see is
they have been going down two
thousand eighteen it was over a
both in population and in
bookings.
and so you see the the green
slide in the the green colored
graph in the middle that shows
you what happened with our
interested to see the really
significant reduction in
juvenile detentions over the
years
in two thousand fourteen I think
there were fourteen juvenile
detention facilities in the
And then on the back page this
is a more detailed look at
detention population because I
wanted you to understand that
We've been on a a sort of a
persistent increase in
population in our detention
facilities and I think that is
and for the last year and a half
we've actually been seeing more
more people in the detention
facility
and then the last thing I wanted
challenge for our facilities and
I I'm very proud of the way that
County detention facilities have
managed to keep
explosions of cases from
You know often with COVID but
the quarantine periods they've
done that strategies that that
we've been using in our jails I
think I've been really effective
but what you can see on this
fifteenth is the arrival of
Omicron which has put incredible
stress on our facilities and and
Mr chair with that but I I would
early by tomorrow have all The
presentation materials today
posted in a place where we'll
we'll get the word out the law
be available to everyone members
that today was the deadline for
appropriating money in a junior
bill you'll see the nods my
colleagues around the room
everybody is gone spending money
not doing a vote today on
anything will have this matter
back before us again but I
thought it would be a good
opportunity to begin the
with any questions before we
recess for the day.
All right I'm not seeing anyone
well let me just make a few
that keeps going back to my mind
is the scene from cool hand Luke
of what we have here is a
failure to communicate and so
very candidly when I sometimes
will point to others and the
others will point to the police
and you receive a lot of that
even in the data The
presentation day I don't think
it's done negatively but but I
crimes in in part of the goal
that I had it for today's
presentations and I hope
throughout the session will be
to show the issues are far more
complex than adding three or
that I've said is been
misconstrued so let me be very
pointedly clear about it I've
never said this is only in
Albuquerque problem of course I
would never believe that many of
you also Verde for years have
and then very candidly of they
want to live someplace else and
and the reason they given their
friends give when I talk to the
agency crime they have to ask
themselves in their early
twenties is is where they want
they they don't feel safe in the
city okay and I've been a victim
of crime in Albuquerque and I've
when I've been a victim of
property crime in Albuquerque I
called the police and made a
report the person who stole
statistical value of my crime
being reported but that that
would be the extent of of the
the effort made there too.
I think that the district
Committee things like the
McClinton decision which I've
spoken some bit about during the
interim committee but the fact
that that there's an agreement
in place that certain crimes
Albuquerque police will not
I have to ask ourselves what
values that sometimes when the
laws we pass over the don't get
enforced I worked really hard to
pass the red flag bill a couple
years ago is very controversial
Solarz a being ignored so so we
can pass laws all day long
appear and make ourselves feel
good but my concern is when we
do that we think we're
accomplishing something we're
really maybe not and and just
McClendon agreement is that it
was adopted because there was
overcrowding the jails.
But it was overcrowding of the
downtown detention center back
amount of certain goods or you
commit other very crimes it's
not addressable offense the and
it's not surprising to me that
maybe eight to morale problems
with law enforcement we're were
district attorney said of the
specific rules that apply to him
only among other counties but I
appreciate hearing from the
district attorney's president
that this is a problem clearly
political issue.
it is four four at the forefront
of the discussions and I I hope
that if nothing else today we
realize it's really not just as
appreciate LFC I hope they'll
re evaluate always be open to re
evaluate their data with input
from others and I hope the
district attorney will share
dust will talk to LFC you'll
we'll reconsider the findings
and conclusions on that same
thing with the public defender's
I've always a in the last couple
years to try to make this point
second largest city hundred
eleven thousand eight hundred
seventeen murders last year in
Albuquerque we have nine.
Los crucis.
Of the nine in Los crucis all of
the population we're nine your
one hundred seventeen.
And and ours have been closed
what we're I'm gonna use we're
closer been arrests made week we
while I I've never suggested
it's a Bernalillo county problem
only I do think that we have to
ask ourselves what is different
about impressed Bernalillo
county the Los crucis for other
heartbreak please remember I've
live nine years of my life in
Albuquerque.
and my heart is there and it's
heartbreaking to think that the
that my daughter's generation
next step which is to be great
lawyers and doctors and stay in
New Mexico and and I hope you
can understand the the
heartbreak that that the brings
thank you for those of you who
were here today again this year
attention as opposed to your
junior money you must've been
ahead of the curve Senator is
doing consider Stuart good for
