Two
is the primary way but.
For.
That number of people who live
here today with us.
And for all other outside fifty
minutes talk about the use of
force.
Representative Rubio
Very.
Are for today I'm very pleased
with where Mexico that is on to.
What are the future use of force
and not have the service brought
together today on practices.
All of this researchers.
So.
So the progress that we made
for.
Direction in the last.
Although it or recession is
that.
Really their back and say with
the new.
and and and look at what we did
that was rife and let people
know what we did was right and
then look at things that maybe
we need to fine tune some as
well so the the my Senate
colleagues having heard some of
those remarks that earlier this
morning I know that just for
those of you that are here there
was a lot of concern last couple
years of usual qualified
immunity weird about that at the
national level all the time now
the there is concern that that
was going to have a chilling
effect on law enforcement hope
that's not the case I trust
that's not the case of like why
is the Senate took a leadership
leadership role on body cameras
years back there was a lot of
opposition to the issue of body
cameras I kind of went head to
head with the the insurer from
Bernalillo county and we clashed
over the issue we impose body
cameras as a loss statewide in
the world and then in fact again
I think we have to recognize
that a lot of what we know and
what deserves credit to the law
enforcement community is by your
body cameras and and
appreciating your job so that's
the purpose of today's hearing I
think we've got some interesting
presentations for this committee
as is always my goal etcetera
every serve before we get.
The path with the ones that were
properly accounted for not the
good ones but what we'll do
we'll talk a little bit about
that today too yeah we'll we'll
talk I think of you know there
was a telling remark I wish I
wish all of all of you could all
be at all the things that we're
all at together there was a
press conference of early in the
session the governor could be
the number of people in there is
something very important to me
to hear which is the chief of
police for Albuquerque said that
he had spoken with the incoming
chair of more in the last week
that he spoke with the outgoing
sheriff in three years
that address was inaccurate
statement and it's been the
point that I've been trying to
make really for two or three
years here which is the the
problems may not be an absence
of laws that need to get past
that really rather better
communication cooperation.
Ross the agency so that's that's
a little bit of insight thank
you that's that are we so
professor Rankin what was that
we got to we got.
Everybody here who need to be
here staff for service ranking
you hear someplace
there are okay.
professor we're going to turn
the agenda overview for smallest
I am here gonna technology works
please you can hear me.
Yes Sir okay we could hear you
well to we view of with the like
to give us your thoughts please
when I ask you to keep it again
to ten to fifteen minutes find a
very.
Thank you good afternoon good
afternoon Senators Terman said
about this calling senators and
thank you for this opportunity
and I'm watching my time
carefully and I will hold you
long my name is Sonia Gipson
Rankin associate professor of
law University of New Mexico
school of law there I teach
courses on technology in the law
family law towards
course of the race law and my
research publications on
implicit implicit bias
artificial intelligence and the
criminal justice system I also
had a chance to do some
presentations and work about
these topics before the JBC
judicial conclave ceilings
throughout the state and in
training Mexico court staff so I
wanted I was asked to come and
think about our share some
thoughts on this question of
race use of force and the data
tiring Nicole so just so
everyone is aware on January
seventh twenty twenty three
tiring Nichols of Memphis was
returning to his mother's home
and about one hundred about two
hundred yards from his home was
stopped by the police for what
would be seen as a
as based off of reckless driving
would be claimed by law
enforcement within a few moments
he would be beaten track from
his car and it would attempt to
get a way to get to safety
there's about a hundred yards
from his mother's home and he
ends of the building again and
subsequently dies from the.
Thanks our content as I was
asked to address this question
and it helped give some context
to this question how does race
still of actor and hiring angles
that and so I want to start by
just kind of giving a little bit
of the Lansing as we know as it
relates to police stops
intrusive actions and what it
looks like and how it is yes the
defined in and right now we
don't really have the best
clearer picture across the
United States the FBI is charged
with keeping statistics on
things such as students we don't
have the same kind of level of
detail as it relates to use of
force but we do know that use of
force by law enforcement can
expand anywhere from limited
verbal communications all the
way to the use of force and
weapons so anything from us so
miss their vehicle at least some
physical contact such as
removing them from their car
some kind of detention at least
handcuffed and looking all the
way up into involving an
officers weapons such as aiming
the fire are but not firing the
weapon or the officer using the
weapon and whether it's a fire
on the trying to by chemicals
right from the time and what the
scholarship is showing us is
that there is a disproportionate
use of force based off of race
in the United States that I just
want to give you some context
and twenty nineteen Stanford did
a study where they gathered
about one hundred data from one
hundred million traffic stops
between twenty eleven and twenty
seventeen and what they
discovered was that black and
Latino and Hispanic drivers were
much more likely be stopped and
searched for less reasons even
though more illegal contraband
found on white drivers and these
conclusions have been repeated
countless studies as of twenty
eighteen study of South Carolina
looking at fourteen years of
data that show that black
drivers there were sixty three
percent more likely be stopped
and one hundred fifteen percent
more likely to be searched than
white drivers even though black
drivers in South Carolina drove
less.
There's a twenty twenty study
Commission by the Michigan state
police out of Michigan SO black
were significantly more likely
to be stopped twenty twenty one
public policy institute of
California did a study of four
million traffic stops with the
found lacking were much more
likely to be searched at a rate
of twenty percent compared eight
percent for white individuals
even though they were slightly
more contraband found on white
individuals and this report goes
on and on and so it raises and
and give brings us to this
question this debate in criminal
justice and corrections why the
racial disparity in stocks and
so there's a major thoughts on
that idea.
So I guess my expansion it helps
us to go a little bit further
not just thinking about why are
men of color particularly
disproportionately represented
in the system but does this
disparity actually amount to
discrimination and
discrimination here I'm using as
a bit of a legal term of
differential treatment approved
without reference to individuals
behavior or qualifications so
there's three trains of thought
the first thought is
differential criminality the
individuals are more likely
stopped because there are where
they live the communities are
highly policed there's higher
rates of poverty which can lead
to more range of lawless or
potentially infraction behavior
that there are some penalties in
those spaces that have one
arguments the second argument is
this is a matter of a few bad
actors with in a in a criminal
justice system that the
incremental decisions all across
the system our what is leading
to the disadvantage that this is
an instance of racism but just
the instance of racist behavior
by individuals and if we could
address those loan individuals
along the process we would be
able to we're able to unpack why
there's such a disparity in the
system is the third.
The theory is let's change the
conversation from criminal
justice and turn it over to
health care let's change it over
to education much changes to how
let's change it to banking let's
take it to any other community
and you'll discover the same
outcome that this is simply just
a reflection of what it could
end up being systemic racist
behaviors and communities.
Back through those three areas
and see why we have some
concerns with them on the first
one of differential criminality
is actually being proven across
the country to not be true you
may remember the NYPD did as the
serious stopping first study
where they discovered that even
though blacks you know for being
disproportionately first and
stop the amount of contraband
and were found on the white
individual stopped we're
actually significantly higher
well that brings us a little bit
to what's happening in Memphis
because the question then
becomes how was race a factor if
these five police officers to
black paramedics and a white
officer were involved and this
was a the black said this in
person in the community who
would be stopped and he is the
one of the attack how is this
still a race issue.
And this is a little complex
because it reminds us that we're
actually looking at a much
deeper concern within
communities you may remember
when Freddie gray died in
America in Baltimore under
Baltimore police department
custody which also involved
black officers and black
black individual who have been
stopped and had been taken at
that moment and it becomes to a
larger question at this point
larger point the point was never
focus on the race of the law
enforcement officer but has
always been on the way that the
system treats and regards black
individuals with in the system
and so we have a few different
levels to think about and and on
some levels there is concern
doesn't release to internalized
racism did the individuals
involved get a sense that black
lives were to be less value than
others was there some idea of
that there are concerns of
interpersonal racism right this
would fall into that second
theory that it's just a few bad
actors are individual behavior
more racist individuals that is
leading to the this mistreatment
but we come to a larger point
Wirth institutional is this
something that was in the
criminal justice process that
was in the policing system that
let this kind of behavior
continued unfettered out of
control.
A larger larger context fall
into this idea of whether or not
this is also something related
to systemic biases so let's turn
this away from looking at
national information and I
thought it would help us to
think a little bit about how
race and use of force matters in
the state of New Mexico.
Then have a long history of
historical races pop police
practices and twenty twenty one
they actually did discover that
Memphis police abuse force
against African American men
seven times more frequently than
white men but we have a
different context The New Mexico
because the New Mexico as you
know our numbers are a little
bit different I had an
opportunity to review the
Albuquerque police department
twenty twenty one preliminary
use of force report and I am
grateful to APD and the work
they've done I'm I saw some
really strong movement from the
previous use of force report to
this one as they were more
nuanced understandings
representation of race and
ethnicity and what will notice
if you get a chance to look at
that police department report on
use of force is that we're now
unpacking the distinctions of
race and ethnicity and I
understand that those things
overlap what does that really
have to tell us what is no is
that there is a in a place like
New Mexico where the black
communities Albuquerque for
example represents three point
zero nine percent of the
Albuquerque metro area that over
eleven percent of black
individuals who were the ones
who were engaged in forced
interactions with law
enforcement and native Americans
would represent ten percent this
would be significantly higher
our the actual percentage of
individuals in the community
so there's a little bit hard to
do this though because at the
end of the day we actually do
look at the numbers of use of
force in Albuquerque in
particular as an example we're
talking about seventy nine black
individuals out of sixteen
thousand so that live in the
community which makes it very
hard to kind of I mean with
those kind of numbers kind of
pinpoint exactly what went wrong
it helps us to think about the
role of race for more carefully
this is the if you were to look
at the over put the use of force
has released from ethnicity
against legislation the Latino.
Those within the city state of
New Mexico and the City of
Albuquerque and so I encourage
you to take some time to look
through that reporting in
essence with that but the most
critical thing about how this is
possible how is it that black
Americans looked at the person
in their communities such as
Tyree Nichols and perpetuated
this extreme force well it goes
to a larger systemic problem
that we have in our society of
the devaluation of black white
where the image of the black man
the black woman the black child
has received the broader brush
strokes of other as disorganized
deprived done disadvantage
dangerous deviant appraising
didn't disturb and needing to
this extreme oversight systemic
racism is our culture here and
individuals of all backgrounds
in every profession but in this
one in particular have been
conditioned within the American
system to devalue Act money and
this is actually been proven
quite a bit of scholarship where
us stand for report from two
thousand eight discovered that
the historical myths and
stereotypes of linking black
Americans two eight percent
primaries is part of the reason
why so many persons will sub
consciously devalue right this
was followed up in studies out
of Stanford looking that even
when the racial disparity is
raised to individuals actually
increases support for harsher
punishment and treatment of
individuals within the
corrections will test the system
black boys will be viewed as
older less innocent than young
white boys like women will be
not given the will be treated in
a disproportionate manner based
off of their gender and their
race and we end up coming to
something pretty complex unpack
which is a quote from the famous
anti lynching scholar I W. wells
Barnett I did the wells Barnett
will say the way to right wrongs
is to turn the light of truth
upon them I'm very.
That about what occurred to
tiring Nichols I encourage you
when you go look at the sunset
tonight like he likes to do you
reflect for a moment on that
last and said he saw that he
didn't expect to not ever get to
come come home from I encourage
you to think about the role that
unconscious attitudes and
believes can play in each and
every one of us and our biases
in our conscious manners I thank
you for this time I'll be
available for questions and
further conversation thank you
chairman some process thank you
Senators thank you professor for
reminding presentation and we
will come back to questions for
you will ask all members of the
of the committee present today
they can stick around for
questions at the end we next
have professor Michael Avery
from the Suffolk university law
school.
That you professor on the screen
I assume so now this is right
here you go I I'm
I'm distracted and distracted
over here to try and looking up
I'm thinking everything's on the
big screen specially since is it
suffered welcome professor thank
you for being here.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee for
this opportunity to talk about
excessive force here with the
legislature in New Mexico
I practiced law act Lee for
thirty years and then I was a
professor for sixteen years I've
handled the literally hundreds
of cases of excessive force by
police I'm one of the co authors
of the leading treatise for
lawyers about a police
misconduct in in connection with
that we come out with the yearly
addition of the book I probably
review between two hundred and
fifty and three hundred decided
appellate court cases of of
excessive force every year so
after over the last fifty years
I have looked at literally
hundreds or more than a thousand
cases of excessive force by
police and in connection with
that
these are the ideas I have about
what constitutes an appropriate
use of force policy for police
department or for a state like
New Mexico what do you need to
have in order to have an
effective use of force policy in
my opinion you need at least
five things and I will briefly
tell you what those five things
are first the use of force
policy has to be comprehensive
by comprehensive I mean the use
of force policy has to tell
officers what they may do and
what they mean that do it has to
provide for discretion when
discretion is necessary but it
has to limit discretion when
limiting and discretion is
appropriate it has to provide
for the review of officers to
use force it has to provide for
a timely method
for accountability for officers
who use excessive force and it.
Has to have a system of
maintaining data so that the
department or in this case the
state of New Mexico can review
the use of force in the past and
make sure that the policy is
being complied with in the
absence of a comprehensive
policy
telling officers what they may
do in Maine that do or even
bringing lawsuits against
officers is not effective in
limiting the use of excessive
force secondly a use of force
policy has to go beyond
constitutional law.
The founders of our nation who
drafted the constitution and the
bill of rights we're not
drafting a use of force policy
for police departments and the
judges who interpret the
constitution today are not
interpreting the constitution or
the bill of rights in light of
what constitutes appropriate use
of force slide please only the
most egregious only the most
outrageous violations of liberty
are prohibited by the
constitution a use of force
policy has to go far beyond that
just to give you one example the
constitution doesn't really tell
us much about whether police
should fire their weapons in
moving vehicles but a use of
force policy should dictate when
officers can fire their weapons
and moving vehicles and when
they cannot.
Third.
I use of force policy has to
have a broad definition of what
are the totality of
circumstances that are taken
into account first by the
officers in deciding what force
they should use and secondly by
decision makers in deciding
whether or not the use of force
was appropriate.
The Supreme Court has said that
the use of force by officers
should be viewed under the
totality of the circumstances
but federal judges interpreting
that decision have a very
limited view of what
circumstances should be taken
into account in deciding whether
or not forces appropriate a
broad definition of the totality
of the circumstances would
include not only everything that
is present in happening at the
moment forces used but also what
has led up to the use of force
in a given situation what did
the officers know about the
people they're dealing with this
is particularly important when
we're talking about legislation
or subjects who have mental or
emotional conditions which get
them to react in a way different
from other people I once wrote a
law review article called
unreasonable seizures of on
reasonable people and in in
connection with that research
and my subsequent research I've
come to find out that a lot of
federal judges don't think that
they should take into account
when assessing the use of force
that the person against whom
force was used was having some
kind of mental breakdown or some
kind of emotional problem of
course that should be taken into
account.
The officers training should
also be taken into account as
part of the.
Totality of the circumstances
federal judges like to say a
violation of police training is
not a violation of
constitutional rights okay fair
enough as far as it goes but a
violation of police training may
be a violation of appropriate
policy and the use of force
policy should consider the
training as part of the totality
of the circumstances that should
be taken into account in
assessing the use of force
forth and appropriate use of
force policy.
Should encourage and reward de
escalation by officers when
they're confronted with a
volatile situation and should
provide sanctions for escalation
in appropriate escalation
sometimes officers have been
escalated I understand I
understand that sometimes things
are out of their control and the
situation escalates itself but
unwarranted escalation by
officers should be sanctioned an
officer should be encouraged at
every possibility to de escalate
situations I have reviewed so
many cases.
So many cases particularly cases
involving individuals who are
suffering from some kind of
mental disability where the
activity of the officers is what
really caused the situation to
escalate and really led to the
use of deadly force
escalation is do a red do
escalation rather is an
essential element it has to be
encouraged and the failure to de
escalate has to be sanctioned
and finally fifth.
Intervention by officers who
were present at the scene.
Some of the worst examples we've
seen of excessive force and I'm
talking about Rodney king I'm
talking about George Floyd I'm
talking about Tyree Nichols some
of these cases are classic
examples where the worst
possible scenario could have
been prevented if just some of
the officers present had stepped
forward and said wait a minute.
This is outside policy this is
not necessary this is going to
fire.
This is actually one of the
latest things in policing that
is getting a lot of attention
across the country training
programs to encourage officers
to intervene when other officers
are violating policy violating
somebody's rights going too far
the city of New Orleans I used
to live in New Orleans before I
moved to New Mexico couple years
ago the city of New Orleans
which.
Fair to say has had its more
than its share of problems with
police violence but now the city
of New Orleans is conducting a
training program to encourage
officers to understand that it's
in their interest and in the
interest of their fellow
officers to intervene to keep
situations from getting out of
hand if you've watched I'm sure
you have watched these horrible
tapes of the of the Tyree
Nichols situation one of the
things that bother me the most
about that tape almost as much
if not more than the actual
beating was watching ten fifteen
twenty officers standing around
while this poor fellow was
slumped against the side of a
car for twenty twenty five
minutes half an hour before he
was rendered NEA.
You have to ask yourself.
How can fifteen twenty officers
stand there and do nothing when
somebody is in so this need of
medical attention
as I said these famous cases
which have so disturbed the
country over the last several
years all could have been
prevented if an officer had just
stepped forward and when I say
training programs that show the
officer that it's in his or her
interest as well as the fellow
officers interest to intervene
that these training programs are
based on personal advantage in
other words and you know if if a
police officer would take a
bullet to protect another
officer's life.
Wouldn't that same officer speak
up to keep the other officer
from losing his house from
getting sued from having his
marriage destroyed because he's
involved in some horrible
incident like happen to to Tyree
Nichols it would have been a
favorite to those five officers
if somebody else present it said
wait a minute guys.
Stop.
Think about what you're doing
this then isn't even raise you
gotta back off.
Thank.
So just to repeat and then
concluded Mr chairman a policy
should be comprehensive.
It should go beyond
constitutional law and to what
makes sense from a public safety
point of view it should have a
broad definition of the totality
of the circumstances that have
to be considered when assessing
whether force is excessive it
should reward de escalation and
sanction on warranted escalation
and it should encourage officers
to intervene in their own
interests and the interests of
their fellow officers to stop.
Pilots from getting out of hand.
Mr chairman thank you very much
members of the committee thank
you Sir and I hope you'll be
able to stick around for some I
certainly will serve up to
before you as you as you sit
down have you met the any of our
law enforcement representative
here today have you have I've
had the pleasure of meeting the
sheriff just a
Aaron introduced me to the
sheriff of the just one before
we got started we have a
secretary of DPS was here Mr
Boeing and achieve a you have
ever met before your dad chose
to state police my pleasure.
you know one of the goals that I
think we can accomplish here on
this committee is having you
all.
Meet each other.
I realize you have a tremendous
resource if both of you working
back.
This committee can be maybe a
facilitator of these types of of
dialogue so
Representative two chiefs
association.
Thank you for being with us
thank you for having.
But I would like to talk a
little bit about
some of things I've talked to
the years on and that is
training and its impact on law
enforcement
of which the use of force
policies and the subsequent
investigations of use of force
is part of it.
First thing I want to talk about
is hiring I'm sorry to you
before that would you introduce
yourself and then just tell us
what you're position is in
relationship to the association
the association is just briefly
give us a little just a quick
introduction who you are
certainly.
I'm Steve having I I was a
police officer in anchorage
Alaska for twenty three years
and in twenty fourteen I came
down here and I took the chief
of police job in Farmington New
Mexico where I've been now for
nine years I was presented
police chiefs association for
two years I know the immediate
past president of the chiefs
association thank you.
So the first thing that I want
to talk about is is hiring and.
Mmhm.
What what should be some of the
basic minimums that we expect to
police departments when they're
hiring police officers I know
that that has been the topic for
us through the last several
years when I've testified in the
sessions
that we're we're recycling bad
officers that we don't know when
somebody is at an officer that's
been fired and I think we can do
some things and should do some
things
to facilitate better standards
and hiring first of all do we
should be mandating that there
is a background check where
everyone who is work for police
department previously that that
police departments contacted.
So somebody lose my agency and
goes off to a plan another
agency that agency should have
to contact my department and
take a look with a signed
release from the applicant and
take a look at our I. A. files
which we which we routinely
given to them.
So we will we'll let the person
sit there and whoever's
Representative that agency and
they'll go through the file and
they'll see exactly what issues
we had with that individual that
should be basic for every police
department honestly there's
there's no reason that you
should be hiring a top was been
a cop someplace else and you
don't you don't to a background
in contact his former employer
and find out how that went and
and what what went well and what
didn't.
Secondly one of the one of the
challenges for us as we sit here
now all of us view from your
perspective in mind.
Of of trying to to put police
officers on the street is in in
general right now policing is
not viewed as an honorable
profession and so some of the
rhetoric that we've seen from
some of the more extreme
quarters has certainly hurt that
I was at training earlier this
year Saint Louis police employee
was relaying a study that he had
access to it which only fifty
percent of people in the age
bracket of twenty one to twenty
nine view policing is an
honorable profession.
Then that that is stunning
because that's a group I'm
trying to hire and only fifty
percent of them now view
policing as an honorable
profession and showed the stats
and and they went up markedly so
by the time you're my age you
know we all think police
integrate profession but I'm not
out there on the streets and I'm
not just darting a career so we
we have to continue to look for
ways to reform and improve
policing which I'm all for
without demonizing the
profession and and that is a
challenge and and if his results
bear out in other studies I mean
that that is standing for us
that that one out of every two
in that age bracket we're trying
to hire automatically would not
consider the profession because
they don't considered honorable.
So that that are hiring are two
things that that I think we
should be looking at training is
another one which I've talked
extensively about in this case
as as we're looking at some of
the stuff that goes on around
the country and then we look at
some of the challenges we have
here in New Mexico I I would
focus today's discussion more on
our training at the executive
levels.
So what does it take to be a
police chief what we want to see
in a police chief what we want
to see in a senior command level
officer no first of all it every
every the basics of being a
police chief should be command
school was eleven weeks school
that frankly SMI sergeants to.
But I know that some chiefs in
our in our state do not have
command school in their history
and that's all the basics of
running policy of running budget
of working in internal affairs
of looking at hiring practices
it's an eleven week course it's
taught in a variety of different
formats we generally use
northwestern school of police
staff and command that's what I
went through they continue to be
all wrong it's eleven week
course on on how to be a more
effective executive officer.
Additionally I would I would be
saying is somebody within every
agency whether it's the chief
executive officer or to one of
the command level officers in a
smaller agency in my agencies
down the sergeants they should
be forced to attend mandatory
internal affairs training.
So if we want good
investigations they get to the
core of what happened in the
case you have to have trained
investigators to do it there's
forty or classes all over the
place to do it we send our
internal affairs we have two
sergeants that going what we
send our internal affairs our
our internal affairs
investigators off to the school
but we also send others off to
the school Montoya and above so
that they know what the basics
of of a quality internal affairs
investigation is today you can
now do that that is expanded you
can now do that with you
supports investigators.
So their use of force
investigation courses we have at
Farmington we have a sergeant
who does nothing but review
everything supports our
department gets into.
No we were on board with the
with the body cam program as you
know senator before the bill
passed and what we know is we
can review everything we have
the body cam footage if we don't
actually have incur as well so
we can review every use of force
that our officers get into and
we do that but that takes a
trained investigator that knows
what here's your policies as as
the previous speaker went to I
agree with almost everything he
said those are good quality
policies but then you got to
follow up with good quality
investigations from good quality
trained investigators and so I
would tell you we could easily
make that part of part of state
statute that somebody within the
within the department has to be
trained in use of force
investigations.
Then finally the the the last
thing I would say is on on
training for executive level is
there is there needs to be some
sort of training class and in
some states do it California has
one executive level certificate
you have to have in order to be
a police chief in in California
we we shouldn't have right now
with the chief says of of police
association a forty hour course
it's called the new in future
chief training and brings in
cheese around the state it
brings in chiefs were support
currently experienced and and
our speakers and we train new
folks who are coming in command
level and and new chiefs in one
of the basics of of being a
police chief how do have
policies how do do some of the
I. investigations wow how do you
deal with liability how do you
deal with with disciplinary
matters what and and and that is
not something that every chief
that's coming into New Mexico
right now has in an extensive
amount of and so again if we
want to get a bad actors we have
to do quality investigations and
then we have to do follow up
with with reasonable discipline
that you can justify and wind
later on in in hearings either
in arbitration or in court and
so that that is a course that
again could come from the state
level that we mandate that there
be formal training in order to
be a chief executive and and
that is done in other states.
some of some challenges that
that I will point out that I
know you know of and.
But I believe it would help us
to be more effective as a state
the the the retired retire issue
is is one that continues to dog
us and I understand both sides
of the issue I hear the I hear
the union's concerns about it
but right now what happens is
somebody hits twenty years
twenty five years eventually
with all the experience and all
the training that the department
is putting it to that individual
and that our state is pointing
to that individual and he
retires and he leads to another
state and he's achieve someplace
else.
So I've got to that once the the
chief of the of the Navajo
Nation he was a deputy chief
with us he retired he's now
chief of police at the Navajo
Nation I've got another one
whose deputy chief with us is no
chief in Casper Wyoming I've got
another command level officer
who will be achieved eventually
when he wants to be he's up in
Durango just jump across the
border that that is a brain
drain from us at a critical time
in policing we need good leaders
we don't need them to leave
otherwise you're totally
dependent that you're gonna get
somebody like me who's going to
come in and is going to be
qualified and do a good job.
But that's a guessing game and I
didn't even have the New Mexico
history so we should be looking
at how can we keep even if you
kept it even if you do a retire
rehire for chief executive
officers and you kept it five
years we don't want that
experience leaving so some other
state is benefiting from and
then all the small towns in in
New Mexico especially down south
that could take one of my
lieutenants or one of my
captains and make him a chief
but there the return we hire to
the drawing their pension the
cap of five years but we're
keeping that experience with
smaller departments all over the
place that right now I know from
my time in the chiefs
association they're struggling
to get leaders down there and so
we if we're going to make
changes and we're going to have
progress in the profession it
starts with leadership and it
starts with training and so
those are the things I came here
to kind of talk with you about
I've certainly talked about and
in the past but but they are
more critical with each and
every passing day when we when
we keep asking why does the
stuff keep happening it's
because we're not doing a good
enough job on the basics it goes
to the training it goes to the
hiring it goes to who's leading
and I thank you thank you Judy
will chair the request a free as
well to next presenter Tim
Johnson chief New Mexico state
police.
But that was for the older than
what.
Mr chairman of the committee
appreciate the opportunity
and I appreciate you talking to
me beforehand should a call
yesterday maybe over slept last
night
and I do I do appreciate the
previous presentations
committees vastly over and over
and.
I've been here before so.
So if you know the topic you
asked me to talk about is
obviously very important it's
more important over the last
several years as things have
been highlighted that any police
officer worth his salt has been
discussed and by
and I don't have to name all the
incidents that occurred in one
occurred on Friday that we all
saw and
that's not what I Representative
is not what my organization
represents all think that's what
New Mexico representative and we
were all just as disgusted as
anybody in that town in that
state.
We sat in front of you in twenty
I believe the session of twenty
twenty one of COVID hit in March
I think of George Floyd was
early summer that year and we
heard.
Everything that you all were
screaming for
because our our public was
screaming for that the people we
serve.
And I I can tell you if you're
ever looking for a police
department to be perfect the
number will be because there's
humans involved but I can tell
you from my agency and and and
the state frankly I think the
state has done a lot
by way of addressing what you
were screaming for what the
public was screaming for after
they saw the George Floyd thing.
I want to explain a few things
to you before we get into our
use of force policy maybe we
won't even I can just email it
to and you can read it a lot of
legal language that frankly I'm
not smart enough to understand
all of your lawyers you do but
some of those things in a and
when I say we heard you loud and
clear we heard our public loud
and clear.
You know they wanted us to have
better interactions with the
people we serve.
And we've been trying very hard
to do that
something as simple as critical
incident training which at the
time of when the public was
demanding more of us we only had
seventy officers.
to the today we have two hundred
eleven and I have a department
that's of six hundred twenty
sworn right now maybe a little
bit more.
So we have a long way to go on
that so those things they take
time to get all that done as you
can imagine.
Thirty officers per class one
class a month they have to come
down to kirke it's also
expensive.
But we're getting there and my
goal of my promise to you and
those we serve was that every
single member of the state
police would have a basic level
of C. I. T. and I think that's
important and we're striving to
get there.
Second piece that I think is
important all of these things as
everybody mentioned are
hopefully things that are going
to prevent us from having to use
force in the first place.
Another thing that we
implemented that we don't have
to.
Was the able project out of
Georgetown University I think
that's what the the gentleman
was talking about in New
Orleans.
I'm not sure but one of three
agencies in the state I think
only three hundred three hundred
agencies in the country who did
that ourselves and what that
entails is they did a lot of
research on how to help people
intervene
you know I always say we call
each other family in law
enforcement money my brother
also my sister officer.
But when you see the things you
see in Memphis those five
officers that were there
initially those people are not
family he would not allow your
family to do that.
So part of able project which
you all need to look up because
only have ten minutes but it's
very in depth and that of the
governor have to sign off on it
I have to sign off on it we got
the N. double ACP local chapter
in Albuquerque to sign off on
that you have to be sponsored
these folks have to believe that
what you're that what you say
you're going to do you're going
to do.
And it's an eight hour class to
begin with I've already been
through it all we started this
late of this the in twenty
twenty two we already have a
hundred and nine officers that
have gone through that in the
class is very good
it's to help people intervene.
So we we did that on our own
again we heard we were screaming
for we heard what the public was
screaming for we're doing our
best.
We also ordered some again some
things that may not be that
important but I think are
important modernizing some of
our use of force training and
that we just got a machine or
three D. virtual reality thing
that helps us make better
decisions
during your supports and
counters where the the kind of
interact with you.
I know we hosted you Sir last
summer would hope that we can
host the host to again in the
interim maybe in the spring or
in the in the in the summer I
would like to show you that that
piece of equipment that we have
it's awesome I think it's going
to help us out again better
interactions with those we
serve.
We revise our pursue policy you
don't ask us to do that we
revise our pursue policy and
those have been drastically
reduced
chasing people for reasons we
probably shouldn't have before
and but now that is lined out
all of our folks are trained on
that so that is slow down on we
all understand how dangerous
pursuits are not only for the
people were chasing of the
officers but like the innocent
public they don't have anything
to do with that interaction so
those have been reduced
drastically you ask for that but
we did that.
You talk about chief heavy
talked about investigations we
we Roadrunner petitioned all of
you for money to have more I am
the sick investigators last year
you get a you gave us that we
had to our new I. investigators
one of them was the use of force
investigator from Albuquerque
which was going to bring a ton
always start apartment and to
review the use of force is the
chief every was talking about us
we're proud of that.
To some of the things I knew
that all of you were screaming
about on some of the people in
the press for screaming about
after a in the twenty one
session was due to intervene
policies then also do escalation
policies that are stand alone
there and they're not just in
our use of force policy we have
standalone duty to intervene on
and de escalation policies.
So again we heard what everybody
was saying we're trying and
again I'll never say that the
state police perfect for
officers in the state are
perfect there's going to be
mistakes made again in the
system that as humans involved
there's going to be mistakes and
but I do believe we're trying to
limit those the best we can
regardless of what the narrative
is at times.
so I have the use of force
policy I can email it to all of
you or if you have any questions
about that also some stats on
ours all that I think are
important I think law
enforcement can do hello a lot
better job of showing the public
and those we serve how
infrequent use of force actually
happens versus how many citizen
contacts and counters that we
have this all point zero
something on which I think is
that we probably should all be
releasing the public so we have
a better understand better
understanding about how often or
how infrequent this actually
happens.
So that survey I'm not sure what
else you want to spend Mr chair
thank you chief that's a good
very good introduction to what
you're doing we ask you to stand
around for some questions
perhaps director do I act when
you and I met I had a time very
briefly for here I know you said
you didn't sleep because you
thought you were coming to a
Senate Judiciary Committee
grilling the the the Pacific to
the contrary I mean I think we
there's a lot that that you're
doing that we've heard from
others that we're doing here in
Mexico that we should be very
pleased and proud of and the
response and let the public in
the press and others no other
that's going on and perhaps we
can persuade the department of
justice in the
others to that the New Mexico is
moving in the right direction
Sir thank you for the chief John
Senator.
Help me is this the first time
in this committee I just moved
at.
The kids that are not G..
There's a customary hazing but
we'll spare that.
It is of no we we you are
welcome you to the committee
Chair of and look forward to
telling us a bit about your
perspective on use of force
every thank you so much Mr chair
committee and everybody in a
room my name is John Allen I've
been doing law enforcement as
nineteen ninety seven also
master use of force instructor
in the master defensive tactics
instructor some of my
I'm huge on training some
experience also was taken over
some of early county sheriff's
office training back in two
thousand and five and that's one
of the reasons when I retired I
was hired by the passionate
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
has it was in its early stages
and I was asked to correct some
things and that's were here and
amended the the new sheriff of
Bernalillo county thanks so much
the new share from Bernalillo
county one basic thing that we
have to remember in a lot of
people would agree with me is
with George Floyd in their own
Nichols humanity and that's
something that we need to look
at when we're hiring people we
we need numbers for all law
enforcement the state of New
Mexico and also the nation of
the one thing that we must.
Inculcate in everybody's
departments is quality over
quantity and everybody needs
twenty or thirty deputies
officers whatever department our
sheriff's office that you're
with your hiring practices as
the chief said is very important
and those hiring practices it
also comes with the chiefs or
sheriffs reviewing something
that will be changed at the
Burleigh county sheriff's office
your share shares review should
be very important it's one of
the last stages in your hiring
process that has asked the hard
questions and also maybe needs
to be scenario based and also
make sure you have some type of
group just not yourself that has
a different opinion and a
different perspective on whether
to hire this person or not
because it will come up to where
you're having to choose between
one or two people who obviously
is the best candidate and the
the chief he brought up
something also as us also be
maybe being able have a database
or something to make sure that
we're looking at.
The internal affairs
investigations are coming from a
different department let me give
an example trained Albuquerque
police department Union County
all different people at the
scene of Law Enforcement Academy
when we're looking at training
people and are looking into
their background it is normal
now for the Albuquerque police
department to have an exorbitant
amount of internal affairs or
more internal affairs
investigations than that comes
from another department that's
because the department of
justice so those are internal
affairs investigations that you
need to look at to read between
the lines to see if they're
serious or as part of the use of
force investigation or do you
actually have a problem with
this person or do you have a
systemic problem within the
people that you're hiring from a
specific department some another
conversation that you need to
address
also training it's huge one of
the first things that I'm trying
to do is we're what I heard the
the drive to professor from
university Mexico talking about
bias.
We need technology and one of
the first things is I I've heard
it is virtual reality training
we had a mile machine everything
is always based and I've seen us
make mistakes on it's just
deadly force are not deadly
force the same time as our State
in a cultural change within the
people that were hired in their
coming to departments is a lot
of people are used to other cell
phones are used to taxed and not
speaking the people are they
able to speak to people and then
are they able to speak to people
during the the situation that is
either of violence are rapidly
evolving and at the same time
you have the teacher people
anybody who says that they do
not have a bias they're lying to
you so virtual reality and
something that I'm looking at
also that I brought to the scene
and through apex officer is
everybody has an implicit bias
everybody in this room has an
implicit bias our job is
parameters is to make sure that
you do not act on that implicit
bias and the only way to do that
is to make sure again that you
other proclivity to make sure
that you're bringing each
scenario other than deadly force
can I speak to the person do
they have common sense and seen
some of the behavior health
problems with the drug addiction
problem are they able to de
escalate but not only that just
like we saw in Memphis are they
able to de escalate themselves
and that goes into the other
conversation of duty to
intervene and I believe we've
had at the sheriff's office and
other people in the state of New
Mexico do do intervene there's
two K. loss in two thousand
three Jones versus Hartford sams
versus Cunningham other very up
front in a practical and says
you have the duty to intervene
on the person that is having
excessive force or less even get
into police brutality to
intervene in their actions set
them to the side and have
somebody else take over the call
and that might even be for them
to be taken off the scene and
taken away.
From there as we go further into
training we need to look when
someone comes from the basic law
enforcement academy wherever
they go.
That is a basic law enforcement
academy whether it's your law
block whether should defensive
tactics use of force and also
your scenario based training
which we need more of and
frequently more throughout your
career just not a basic training
academy for the whole state of
New Mexico after two years where
else does your advanced training
come from.
Is it mandatory.
Is it evolving I have a twelve
page use of force policy for my
office
Times best practices whether
it's state whether it's
regionally weather's nationally
we need to listen experts and
have an open mind and what might
come in from their money in a
different perspective and
actually listen to them to see
if that's something that we can
correct that goes into my next
point of just not a basic
training academy your field
training officer program what is
the culture that you have within
your department or your office
are they teaching you and I can
guarantee you in Memphis that
this isn't the first incident it
was just caught on tape in this
is probably happen again again
implicit bias and also who is
training or new people that are
coming to the Department whether
they would be in a lateral
program or a new hire.
The oldest he'll programs from
the Santo is a system was just
three months and a lot of as
you're gonna get thrown into the
fire going to put in a fight and
see how you react with that
might not go so well because
everybody has a different
learning ability and just in a
different adult learning theory
so we're looking at a different
F. teal program was actually
four months and it's more of an
evaluation period on top of
adult learning theories to make
sure that we're correcting
action within their training and
make sure they don't do this by
themselves once again cutting
down on implicit bias and other
things that you see to the to
the level of the Memphis of
police department.
Also resources and money for
community policing this heart of
your community we can talk about
training all day but unless you
have the ties and restore and
build trust with your community
you're not gonna have a police
department or sheriff's office
second serve them well and also
means for us as chiefs and
sheriffs of any department or
office to be able to take the
hard hits it hard conversations
with the community and why they
don't like us it's going to
happen we hear it all the time
but are we in step with our
community and we actually open
we can talk about an open door
but do we actually have that
policy.
Also discipline I believe every
department issued to look at
it's not consistent around the
state when I took over this
office I pulled five to ten
basis and are disciplined for
use of force incidents it's not
consistent meaning do we have a
common problem is it individual
is it systemic is a systematic
at the same time is it fair from
everybody and again I believe
the one of the professors talked
about totality of circumstances
but a even more basic term is
for use of force in our training
and our discipline as you look
at it and we're talking about
investigators internal affairs
investigators and investigations
what's your scenario.
Sarah from beginning to end.
If it is not fair from beginning
to end and an officer with your
same amount of training or just
somebody this within the
community does not believe it's
fairly order again with Memphis
do we need to look at our use of
force policies and change hiring
practices it needs to be more
consistent among the stuff most
the state maybe some type of
protocol all departments and
sheriff's offices do not have
the same resources that I do in
Albuquerque as is different and
you County stiffening catching
County other needs to be some
type of guidance some type of
stipulation or some type of
framework for someone to at
least have and build off of
their making sure that we always
have the best practices other
net that's my presentation thank
you so much for having me I
think chairman again welcome for
the first time to this committee
have a.
Welcome here election as an
option to reset things I think a
little bit to all just tell you
may not know this history I
clash with your predecessor over
the issue body cameras I think
it's probably pretty widely
reported the press I think this
committees pretty familiar with
the issue too and I look forward
to starting a new with you and
embracing.
Really best police practices
thank you for that too and I
will add one more thing in yes
our body cancel not happy with.
Whether the that that opens it
right up.
I have senator Wirth on
listening and I'm looking around
for others who may have
questions Senator Wirth and just
I'm sorry before you begin to so
those of you join us later we
have a hard stop at five thirty
and we have to bills to hear the
I think that we relatively quick
so I think we can probably go to
about five o'clock for questions
so please the time your comments
recognizing others as well
Center were then Senator Ivey
Soto thank you Mr chairman thank
you for The presentation I have
to say that I'm encouraged again
when you have five panelists
presenting a variety of you
fuses you have Mr chair and
you've got this level of the
kind of understanding and
listening that's a very
encouraging thing I also have
the opportunity to carry the
confirmation twice secretary
following news here
and I would just say it's clear
to me that that a key to this
whole area is leadership having
those at the top that have the
skills and we heard that from
chief heavy
What's happened here in our
state and and the chief are you
of knowledge this.
What's happening is being done.
By listening and then actually
turning around and and taking
action and and I just like I
think we helpful to for the
committee here because we heard
this and rules and was a really
extraordinary.
Madam confirmation just about
what's happening with with our
Avid at the state level first
just just tell us and and she
for Mr Secretary economic crisis
intervention training first
describe what that is described
kind of where the department was
when you took over and kind of
where we're going as a state
because I think clearly hearing
professor Rankin have the
institutional component of this
is so critical and to have
leaders willing to tackle that
and provide the tools to their
teams to be able to address the
situation I was really impressed
by kind of.
What you're doing what the
numbers look like and where
you're going with that so just
maybe that's good for me but the
secretary could just a few words
about kind of where where you
were when you took over and and
kind of where the false.
And Mr we where search jobs as
possible to get workers up here.
Have all of them up if they can
either ask questions up the more
expeditious.
Mr chairman senator Wirth that
thanks for the question I do
appreciate the opportunity to
expand that
one of things we reckon is
really important to make sure
that all our officers were
questioning president mention
training there's a certain
amount of of requirement
basically calling for officers
to be trained in that space we
want to do with the New Mexico
state police in particular was
really to expand upon that and
making sure that everyone had
the forty hour training of basic
C. I. T. and so there's a forty
hour training that's that's
offered there's also advanced
training beyond that and so we
started there and so we made
sure that we had expenditure
raining in that space and so we
were at a very low percentage in
that leader somewhere around ten
percent initially with an
increasingly currently sitting
around thirty three percent this
July will be at sixty six
percent and that C. I. T.
training space and then as the
by the turn of the year that
depends some of it on
availability we can only fit
about thirty people per class is
being offered by public safety
group psychology group and so
depending on the scheduling
we're hoping at the beginning
the year to be a hundred percent
of all our officers in New
Mexico state police as far as
the New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy is concerned and all the
people that that travel through
their naturally we train our
young this officers for all the
different jurisdictions around
the state so we train more
officers within the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy then all
the satellite line so like
a counties combined so we have
put initial emphasis into those
measuring programs well so as we
training young officers about
the different jurisdictions
within state New Mexico they
have that Representative
training and additionally we did
was we recognize agency law
enforcement academy could be so
much more than just the basic
training for many years I know
what I was with the city Rio
Rancho we've had a lot of
leadership yes this is that we
start seeing that advanced
training through Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy is really
nonexistent in in in recent
memory and so we really want to
make sure that we were providing
our.
Pertinence for training through
the school offers an academy to
anybody who would want to come
and so we opened our doors we
offer this training for free and
we started at the the the later
part of last year offering these
exact topics of training I. N.
F. X. de escalation training due
to intervene of some active
shooter training all these these
these topics there are the for
for once mind and so we feel
that was very important and I'll
just compass and it finishes by
saying this of Mr chairman and
senator Wirth is that yeah I
think sometimes there's a
misconception within law
enforcement leadership that we
don't want the same thing that
we don't have interest in the
same thing that the community
wants and I say this a lot
actually infants in our speeches
and and keynote address whether
I'm speaking at an academy
graduates rolling County
recently or the New Mexico state
police arrest Law Enforcement
Academy and are always remind
people that within leadership
that we are often I would say
more frustrated than the
community and I would even goes
one step further and say that
even young police officer out
there working we're truly at
their boots on the ground
grinding day in day out to build
community trust of our extremely
frustrated when things happen
like what happens in Memphis
because we recognize how hard it
is to gain the community trust
Hey can really be road overnight
you know a thousand miles away
and your agency itself may have
nothing to do with that and so
we want the same thing that the
community wants us and I think
sometimes that's of.
People really believe that I
think maybe to a degree of but
it's true and it frustrates law
enforcement to injury when
people start into a space where
they want to make decisions for
us and they want to give advice
and what is needed and sometimes
I think it's important like it
like you Mr chairman I think is
a great opportunity to have all
people come to the table and and
have a discussion but was eating
and Julie openly here everyone's
input hand and try to implement
those but there are times in
sixteen you know usually the X.
the extreme on this side of the
issue searching for what we
don't hear from law enforcement
on could you where the problems
are gonna fix for and and so
I'll finish with saying this I
mean you wouldn't try to fix a
problem within the healthcare
system without getting doctors
of the table the to ask for
their advice you would have
asked me to fix that problem for
your same within accounting and
so we just ask that these type
of conversations Mr chair as is
happening they continue to
happen so that we can truly
provide you we believe as law
enforcement leaders wanting the
exact same thing is really the
best solution and then we push
back on something it's not
because we don't want the same
outcome is that because we don't
believe that that might be the
right way to go so thank you for
the opportunities are presented
with just one other question and
all yield I mean clearly we have
a checker board in terms of use
of force policy and that's one
of things we're talking about in
this committee
I guess what I'm trying to
understand I mean clearly
there's I appreciate very much
here in the current return to
work issue because which
struggle with that as well
So clearly having leadership at
the top is critical but each
year is different and each each
agency each department is
different I mean is to how do
you all feel about I mean a
statewide can we do a statewide
use of force policy that's an
overlay it sets the same
standard it's built by all of
you I'm just curious what your
thoughts are.
There were no higher than the
microphone Mr chair Senator
Wirth I think you're just like
anything else I mean providing
basic curriculum thank you to
the New Mexico offers mechanics
sets the standard what what
should be taught to police
officers right and I think
within policy I don't disagree
there either I mean I think you
know your there's a lot of
different agencies around state
of New Mexico and I can't tell
you what is in the overall
Mexico policy or or even she
fears informed employees are
within in this policy for for
that particular agency I think
there needs to be a basic
standard within every law
enforcement agency of things
that are is expected of how we
police and and what we do out
there I don't think there's
anything wrong with that again I
don't think it should be extreme
and I think it should be
obviously of you know that it
through law enforcement make
sure that that all the agencies
hard to reasonable account have
have input on that but you know
supposed pleasantly please an
example SL has served twenty
seven years in state Rio Rancho
when it came with New Mexico
state police as cabinet
secretary you know reviewing the
policies they're extremely
similar and and so I think
you'll find that in a lot
of age is that they might be
worded differently but the
concept of the same and the
expectations are the same and
although the wording in the way
that the the way the sins of the
paragraphs are structured may
not be exactly the same the the
the content certainly is and so
I think it goes to the elements
that should be there much like
you would look at elements of a
crime right I mean I think the
elements of with legislation the
law enforcement certainly could
be in a statewide use of force
policy and and maybe giving some
latitude to the states the
separate agencies to tailor some
of it to their needs but there
should be a basic the state over
late due to intervene should you
question any longer right I the
escalation should be a question
of and so all these things I
certainly should think should we
even to everyone's policy there
should be no that's just my
opinion I don't know if the
other gentleman here so.
I agree also one of the biggest.
One of the biggest issues also
is making sure that the use of
force lesson plan within the
state of New Mexico in the
framework that I spoke about
earlier needs to be the same
satellite academies can extend
and they can add on to that but
again the framework of the case
loss due to intervene again
should not even be a
conversation but then again for
the smaller departments and some
of the lawsuits that I see that
I vet from around the state is
just not actually occurring so
when you go back to what they
were taught the basic academy
which could be something
different again what is the
advancement of their in service
training two to three four years
down the road but at the same
time with use of force what
we're seeing is we need to make
sure also the practical exam and
just defensive tactics we're
going hands on with the use of
force and rapidly evolving all
of us gain weight as we get
older.
But a lot of times what happens
when that law enforcement
officers face with the rapidly
evolving situation and they're
not in the best shape and they
don't have the best techniques
what are they doing going on
hands on because they're not in
shape or because they don't have
the necessary training for the
immediately going to a less than
lethal tool and what we're
seeing with excessive forces
immediately they're going to the
taser and with the taser fails
we're starting to see a lot of
things that we order our office
was we're starting to get to our
last resort being deadly force
so a better framework for
everybody to have but at the
same time for everybody to have
the opportunity throughout the
state of New Mexico because we
are large to have a training
academy or for someone to go to
their smaller entity to train
and make sure that they have
best practices.
Hey Hey yeah that is Senator
Wirth
from an accountability
standpoint I think it makes a
lot of sense to have a policy
that applies to the entire state
you have to bear in mind that
the policy is implemented and
not only by the individual
chiefs and
sheriffs across the state but
also by judges also by public
opinion also by the media
and if there's a patchwork of
what's expected from the
officers that varies around the
state I think it makes
accountability more difficult.
By Preciado professor I think
you're I.
Points kind of our give us a
direction that that super
helpful and so again thank you
Mr chair representative from
most recent.
We were very involved in the
press release said other states
have that that place in my room
some states to test.
Representative our services and
regulations and the assistance
of it too two bills I have no
doubt this committee would be
more than happy to have this
hearing go on for hours and and
and probably gather a great deal
from doing so one of the things
I learned long ago one of those
powerful things that we get to
do here's legislation bring
people together and we we
brought you the other day so I
just sort of I thank you very
much Mr chairman
So I've I've a are for follow
just appreciate all of you for
the.
The presentations I think this
is just been a fantastic
Senate presentations of that
we've had
and and I'm I'm I'm particularly
impressed I will say with the
with the the thoughtfulness of
of the lawn for superstations
and and I'm I'm very.
right now I'm very very proud to
be in the state of with with the
the discussions we've been
having.
I
What I do want to just couple
things what is.
it in and I want to go back to
the test County situation that
happened this past
With the with the family that
was traveling through and there
were two officers.
That were involved.
one of.
One of the officers was his
employment with the state police
was terminated the other one his
employment with the state police
was.
Not terminated I actually had an
opportunity.
To have a conversation with the
previous state police chief
about that a fairly candid
conversation and and he
explained to me alright this
thinking.
Which was that the first officer
the one who allowed.
The situation get out of control
and.
Watch the video a lot of stuff
to get bested by fifteen year
old.
Was.
He was not fired because the.
Chief's view he was a new
officer and still have
potential.
even though that was a bad
situation.
And whether I personally agreed
with with where you end up on
that I I appreciated that
analysis.
Of the other officer the one who
fired into the vehicle and if
you watch the tape.
It's pretty clear he had just
showed up on the scene did not
know what the situation was.
He did get fired that was a
career officer who should've
known better.
But it but nothing happened as
law enforcement certification.
So he was immediately picked up
locally by one of the local
agencies
this is the sort of thing that I
think.
Causes causes people in the
public to lose some confidence.
particularly since it's not
immediately apparent.
Why why what was separated for
the parliament and the other one
was not.
I was privileged to act in a
position to to look into that
but for the public they don't
always see that of course they
don't always will see those
things but the the one that was
separated though and up.
With another.
Representative and so I if I
could just use that as a as a
framework in terms of.
Of of what we do in terms of
officers who.
For whatever reason
it had a rear end up.
And the exhibiting behavior
that.
At the disqualifies a review
that apartment was a qualified
and be with another.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto you
have to bring up that case Sir
as a framework as of yesterday.
this it wasn't the chief at that
time off the hook yes No all
take responsibility for the
I mean I think I'd have to go
back and get in get you an
answer on whether an early
nineties I don't want to get too
technical in years but whether
the forms filled out and sent to
the L. E. A. to have that's that
the officers certification
revoked I have to go back and
look that I don't know that off
the top of my head what I can
tell you is the other officer
that you have concerns about and
why he was kept
which is one of the things I
meant to bring up today
sometimes in the use of force
cases I look at them it is very
difficult as of that's the worst
part of my job I believe is
looking at each of those for
policy violations and what the
best punishment for that officer
is to either a correct correct
the behavior of or be no longer
allow them to be an officer in
the state which that happens at
times to.
And so that that subjectivity
that comes into that is very
difficult but I can tell you
I think I think some of these
kids some of these officers
are salvageable and the chief of
number one is putting his head
on the line by keeping that
officer hoping that he becomes a
productive member of the
organization because if if he
messes up again it'll be the
person in charge of will be gone
next so we're putting our head
online on that but also
understanding and again this
isn't always a reason to not do
something but if if someone is
salvageable working with them to
get them better so they don't
make make to and I can tell you
without naming names of the
person you're talking about is
been of more.
The amendment beneficial to the
state in this organization since
that date was and was signed
auto theft and help reduce that
you know from first to fifth and
has done a lot of good things
with this organization and
speaking of someone who was
showed grace at one point in my
career
and someone allow me to stay on
this department and here I am
today we try to do that for the
for some of these kids at times
to again knowing that's our
could be are it later Mr
chairman and and thank you for
the rest of the all you know I
mean I have the I have the
privilege I have the ability to
watch the video.
Several times I have the ability
to pause the video and back it
up.
From the officer on the scene.
That six seconds to figure out
what to do and and a couple of
the decisions that are much less
than that you know and and
that's one of things that
happens with the use of force to
write is that they're making a
split second decision and we
spend sometimes in court hours
or days by acting.
Every single thing that happened
Sir you know hi
I'm I believe that to be able to
drop my career teaching a few
different discounts.
here in New Mexico and and so
professor Avery one of the
things that.
That I found was a chef probably
aren't.
Fifteen twenty years ago.
And it's in a lot of the county
training was a a philosophy of.
Do whatever you have to do so
that you make at home as the
officer.
And and it and that you make at
home philosophy seem to open the
door to a higher use of force
because it created much more of
an us and them.
View of things that I've state
upstate so the officers not is
I'm saying this
up and and maybe I maybe I pose
the question the wrong person
but but on the panel but you
know if we could if we just talk
about that a little bit in terms
of like what what is the culture
that needs to be created so that
it's not for you as much as a
mask that.
You're asking me I I was but I
might go through could achieve
have you got actually both
actually professor in answering
okay.
Let's let's just record real
quick again and the bill will
come back to the table.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
Senators colleagues and I was
not going to step in but that
mom inTaos could have been me.
And I pause because I remember
watching those videos.
Because I'm a black woman who
drives around in a mini van
throughout New Mexico with my
kids taking pictures and passing
snacks and pointing sunsets and
and pointing to the Clausen
pointing to the rocks and I can
imagine myself in that many them
what stands out to me as I'm
listening to this is that in
that moment both individuals
were petrified I believe that I
believe the law enforcement
officers we're terrified and
that six seconds that you
pointed out Sir and I know that
mother was terrified for the
well being of her young children
and I know what it means that a
fifteen year old son who wants
to defend his mother.
I know what that means.
But in that moment only one of
those individuals is authorized
to use force.
Only one of those individuals
had been trained to de escalate
but if you watch that video
colleagues you'll see it was the
mother who was attempting to
purchase save herself and her
children's lives an attempt to
de escalate that is where I draw
concern I draw concern because
I've had to train my children on
how to de escalate in those kind
of situations.
And they're just kids I know
they're grown up they told me
they're grown upside.
By and large they are just
people going around in public
schools they're just people on
their way to basketball practice
on their way to movies with
friends are going to a local job
and I would worry.
About what does it mean in terms
of de escalation and the
training involved there was
something that one of my
colleagues said it and I am ever
ever so grateful for the remarks
from our law enforcement
officers act I am grateful for
your care and there was a phrase
use that does stand out to me
which is providing Graeser for
these young individuals often
who are young first time on the
job learning on the job and I do
appreciate that there is grace
granted to them but I'm worried
that what happens when that
grace is extended in a way that
means individuals afraid in the
public square thank you for
calling.
Thank you professor service so
back to you and I need you to
move it along with except that
other speakers and we need to
get to the bill so sorry so keep
it keep tab please okay well at
at at I will just we're just
kind of somebody else wants to
add something to what was just
said.
Well I I'd like to add something
which is I appreciate what you
said about to grace
but I think there needs to be
Once decisions are made they
need to have a fact my wife is a
nurse if a nurse loses our
license she can't just go to
another hospital get a job she's
lost her license and and she's
out of the business unless she's
able to convince anybody that
that that she needs to have her
license restored and I think
this probably the same should be
true of police officers if they
lose their certification and
then they should be out of the
business the decision about
whether or not they should lose
their certification probably
should take into account what
you were saying which is
sometimes you need to give
somebody a second chance but
that's a decision that has to be
made intelligently
and if it's made to deny
certification then the person
should be out of the business.
I just want to go back to
festering can focus on last
question and that is that of a
terrorist K. really underscores.
what you're talking about that
it's a behavior has a racist
impact.
and one of the things that has
really happened in that case
people as look at it is that
it's it's been I think.
on the eight it right at this is
a reaction to say.
The police officer is a racist.
and and in this case people of
bill but confused on this and
it's and it's exactly what
you're saying of the distinction
between between leveling the
person versus labeling the
impact of the action.
And and that and that regardless
of the race of the officer.
If if you have an institutional
culture.
That's going to probably eight.
Throughout and in terms of how
people are are
How they how they end up getting
getting treated by by law
enforcement.
I just wanted to comment on that
again real quick and then and
then all of the others.
Yes Sir missed Mr Chairman
Senator thank you so much for
that and and there's a really
good book you all might enjoy
called racism without racists by
professor and what this all of
us in which he talks about this
distinction that's really hard
which is that we have all of us
every single one of us is
something that that share
balances so very poor families
that each of us is struggling
with a set of biases and
prejudices and discriminatory
thoughts within us and conscious
or unconscious manners and those
things will come out to the
forefront what happened to Mr
Nichols in Memphis by those
officers was that they were all
kind of just living in this
shared larger society that let
those kind of actions carried
forward with what they believe
that impunity and just as my
colleague professor shared so
much of and least leaned over
and said Hey you might lose your
job for doing this this might be
considered too far what it had
already gone on so far in terms
of just believing and losing
sight of the fact that of the
humanity of Mister Nichols of
the humanity of individuals in
the public square let this occur
thank you.
Thank you very much of a I
really appreciate that and and
Mr chairman thank you for for
holding this hearing I think I
think it's been really very
consequential thank you senator
doing up to ten minutes please
thank you Mr chair
thank you all this is been.
The right for the patient I also
was really nice to hear
professor Avery this kind of
five point last and then.
Sure Allen Johnson and secretary
tellers
thank you for your.
how so many of the some of the
things that you offer the same I
I I heard a lot of overlap with
those those that list of best
practices
one of the ones that.
And I've heard that that the
escalation training is is
something that you are doing.
and professor.
This might be for you but but
any of you who want to answer
I'm trying to picture what it
means when your you talk about
the incentivizing rewarding to
escalation what does that look
like.
Thank you senator mentioned.
What I was talking about
rewarding intervention but
The escalation if you're talking
about in the middle of an event
The one of the officers chief
might have a better.
Idea about how to encourage that
then I would.
Thank you senator from.
One of the things that we we
haven't done great and policing
through the years is is
recognized times when officers
didn't wind up using force or we
you know we will recognize an
officer with a medal of honor or
something for some brave action
he did and and frequently
deserve but we don't do the same
thing for those officers that
actually acted in a way that the
escalated something and
prevented the need for that and
so I I think some of some of
what the the professor was
talking about is there does need
to be more of a reward system
built into policing that we
recognize say we got out of
something without having to go
to to her role as uses of force
the that then put pull sides at
rest if I also could I just want
to grab back over some of what
you're hearing here in these
conversations about culture of
the agency culture of the
organization decisions on
personnel actions that's why to
me the the discussion has to
start with who who's leading our
agencies you know and and what
that looks like so that's the
the tone sets the tone on the
policy sets the culture do we
value people are we getting
along with citizens do we care
about citizens or are we you
don't or are we perpetuating a
culture that we that we
shouldn't be anymore so that
that to me is why I want to
talking about our future chiefs
and the training and and what
our expectations are because
they set everything that's going
to happen in that agency thank
you.
I really like about focusing on
on that exact kind of executive
level training and I I hope that
that's a medicine here Texas the
just have the ACLU saying those
those three policy centers that
can be a bill
and the only thing are and and
and secretary I've I'm I'm
really excited that I got here
what what amazing work you all
have done hi in that year the
gymnast
There's only one thing you said
that I think if the table is
hardly working after opinion
about I senator Wirth that have
basically feasibility of having
that statewide policy what type
I think you are state would be
would be good for all the wrong
this right at the way I
interpret what you said was that
your thing about as a way to
kind of set minimum standards
and.
And I would just urge this body
as we're looking at those bills
I think it's something that
professor a recession it was his
the second thing on five point
eight which was that the policy
should go beyond the
constitutional.
not not me because we have
someone who gets excellently
trained and then goes back to a.
I agency are violent with a not
great culture and and goes right
back into that so and then if I
missed characterize what you
session for please please please
press Mr chair Senator doing no
no I I mean I did say that but
it's not this is really at the
intend what I meant what I meant
is that if you find a standard
to law enforcement season they
want expand upon that in other
words what I mean by that is
having standards for certain
supervisor being on scene you
for something a lot you know is
allowed to happen or some of
those things that's what I meant
as far as the expansion I think
that the basis for the necessary
for the escalation and and the
all those things should be
empowered to Moses officers I
think you can later certain
responses and I think the the
responses of for every
jurisdiction might be different
and I think that's what I was
referencing I didn't say those
things in my mind this is what I
was thinking about at the time I
I do these if you don't mind
as far as constitutional
standards I think there's
there's two different issues
constitutional standards and
that case law that's recognized
by the United States Supreme
Court in this course policies we
set there hopefully commensurate
with that and so I think
sometimes we get a little bit in
the weeds we start talking about
the constitution itself because
I think the constitution is not
something that I'm the servi
propone for changing I wanna
make sure that I work with a
different point of the
constitution and fight all the
the the protections that that
every United States citizen it
is four and and make sure that
our policies are commensurate
with that and so I think the
difference between two is like
we're having policy discussions
in our mind and sometimes people
are talking about constitutional
changes that sometimes I think
you would get more pushback from
more so than you would make sure
that the policies are
commensurate that every citizen
and we talk about you Senator as
far as a source of them tell the
I can tell you that something
that we have never been a
proponent for never of the age
that I was with I was always
very happy that we were very
much in support of the community
for everything it needed I think
when you can really see want to
community stands with you and
not to make this.
Pull on the heartstrings of
people who when you lose an
officer you see how many people
come out in force and support
you within an organization you
really can see how well you're
doing as a community and I think
a lot of times you know we we
have people are outspoken and
things are going well in other
states and people protest
everything else but the the
majority of people that are in
support for law enforcement use
not as vocal and so I would just
ask in consideration as we start
thinking about you know
constitutional changes I said I
guess we wanted to pause I think
sometimes are reacting was gonna
like stimulus response what was
happening in other states I
would want to be more driving
about I like being proactive
with these discussions I like
making sure that we don't wait
the the something happened let
the that legs having a state we
don't wait for that to happen
here I like that idea but I
don't want to serve the you know
have reactions to what's
happening other states and
feeling like we have to do
something placing policing
because policing is is in
shambles because I don't feel
that that's the case and as we
said I think there's always ways
for the you know to do things
better make sure that we have
policies in place that would
please the best way that we can
and to have these these tough
discussions but again students
are just me personally gives
gives me pause I would like to
work in the framework of
constitution make sure we have
strong policies to make sure
that we that we meet that
standard.
Thank you.
I have says Center stirred I'm
gonna go a little bit longer
than I planned recognize you for
ten minutes Senator think is
important I I hope everyone here
agrees and gathers and looking
around the room it's a terrific
discussion before we break too
much I want to thank the staff
on this committee for putting
this together and to recognize
that this committees property
will differently than other
committees this committee is not
just about passing bills this
this committees about finding
policy and and best practices
I'm beginning to hear the
committee coming together that
maybe we'd like to partner with
you secretary and others in law
enforcement you professors and
professor rank in you know to to
maybe look at a statewide policy
and can come together partner
with the governor and really
accomplish something very
consequential meaningful I I
just a before I go to Senator
I'm just like to note that in
the last session I began for
those we joined as we passed
the.
Prime this bill I've called it
probably I think the most
sweeping inconsequential
criminal justice reform that
I've seen in twenty years
Effective July one twenty twenty
three just briefly of section
twenty nine dash seven dash four
point four regarding law
enforcement training will
include the shall include the
curriculum shall include
subparagraph a crisis management
intervention subparagraph be
dealing with individuals
experiencing mental health
issues FC methods of de
escalation I can go down the
list subparagraph F. racial
sensitivity we're we're getting
there but I look forward to
doing more with you too so
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
join my colleagues in yes thank
you all this is it's it's been
very impactful for me
I have eleven pages notes that
you know I'm a teacher I think.
And and secretary Bowie I've
also heard your changes several
times so
I'm just thrilled to hear
professor ranking again and and
you professor Avery.
And I love our new birth co
chair of the new sheriff in town
so are you wait but so there's
about so hello all of this we've
been handed out this I don't
know where this came from us Mr
Chairman police use of force in
New Mexico.
And the headlights are New
Mexico consistently has one of
the highest rates of killings by
police in the country.
I don't want to believe that
I think what what you all have
laid out is a road map for the
future so I'm hoping that will
change that what what what do we
tell people when we're we're
presented with this in twenty
twenty one police killed more
people per capita in New Mexico
than any other state.
I don't know that that.
That is accurate but twelve
point seven five New Mexicans
per million were killed by
police nearly four times the
national rate of three point
five million I mean this might
be how to lie with statistics
you know statistics damn
statistics and ally with them
an absolute numbers police in
New Mexico killed more people in
twenty twenty one twenty seven
then police in New York twenty
five despite the nine times our
population.
so you know this this is what we
have to answer to when people
tell us this I mean we can then
talk for half an hour about what
our plans are.
What you all have put into place
the up the leadership that
you're focusing on the the new
policies for the burn co chair
of definitely but it's just kind
of hard to give a global answer
when we're hit with things like
this so.
I want to stir the pot but I
still need to answer to
constituents who thank that we
have a major problem I don't
think we've got a major problem
but you know I didn't put the
statistics together so
Any help you can at any if you
Senator Mannering for just a
moment so you're you're
referring to a document police
use of force in New Mexico I
want to apologize to the
committee I did not authorize
this to be handed out I did not
review advance I don't know the
source I don't well I would not
encourage you to rely upon of
this maybe act may be inaccurate
I think in fairness we ought to
perhaps give the law enforcement
this opportunity look at this
and maybe responded so later
time I think that's probably the
fairest way to do that but I I
would tell you that this this
doesn't have any attribution on
it my mistake unfit does Mr
chairman have the statistics of
The OB or fee below it where
they got it from yeah there are
some footnotes in as you all
know the point of saying it's
been statistics in many ways to
set the same thing nevertheless
it is still an issue and is
still something we have to
answer to and it's still the
reason we're here so I've been
told is this the sort of this
ACLU but again I I want to
apologize to create type should
review the finance and and did
not just want to know that.
Mr chair.
I don't know if you don't want
to censor but I have a few the
couple and it does so that but
I'm not I will not make you
Senator.
So I mean.
Again the that's not I don't
think anybody is proud of that
but I think one other thing we
could factor in Senator Stewart
is the fact that we're also
ranked number one in violent
crime in the country per capita
which is I'm hopefully was
included included in that stat
sheet that you received.
No okay in in some of the data
that I mentioned earlier this is
just on behalf of the state
police.
I talked earlier about the
numbers a use of force and again
I'm not making excuses for any
of these things I'm just
trying to counter that either
but maybe some some reasons why.
you know uses of force numbers a
use of force versus citizen
contacts I told you is point
zero something for the last five
years I can also tell you the
last five years these are a a
Salt on on my officers by an
armed suspect who either
directly attacked my officer
closed the distance on my
officer was threatening my
officer two thousand seventeen
and eighteen that was ten two
thousand eighteen nineteen those
twenty five.
Two thousand nineteen and the
twenty that was thirty two two
thousand twenty to twenty one
that was twenty eight and twenty
twenty one to twenty twenty two
is fifty eight.
The sales Mr your.
I mean you're one of the main
people who just talk about
Albuquerque constantly you know
I'm sick of it as the
Albuquerque for forty four years
had my kids there raised my kids
there populous schools for
thirty years I don't feel like
it's changed I don't I don't
have more fear now I don't
restrict where I go in he.
you know we go to the local
games you know we go out to
dinner I walked the streets so
usually my partner with me I
don't do it at night still the.
But.
Kind of undermine your argument.
The streets are I myself forty
four years ago either.
So I just don't I.
I just want to I want us to I
want us to speak these numbers
want to strip the these numbers.
You know the numbers is all
we've got it seems we don't have
this incredible testimony we
don't can't talk to professor
rank in every day we're hit with
these numbers and so I just hope
we're all committed to trying to
be deuce the use of force reduce
the use of police killings
reproducible that I know you are
on I don't want to hear from
Senator survived K. how for
below perky is one more day I'm
I'm just imploring you so the
debate we've had for ten years
Senator fail it's gotten worse
the last two or as an op and I
if I may is the purpose of this
morning I thought of you because
I read the Albuquerque journal
story about a woman on Central
Avenue in San Pedro of major
section you and I probably
driven through thousands of
times your district district by
district has the highest crime
rate in the city woman driving a
cars Sampedro Central Avenue
this last week was shot in the
brain will lose her hi just a
random victim of gunfire in the
area and that's that's kind of
heartbreaking to us all of it's
it's a you have given that St
many many times ourselves we
have many friends and family who
do it all the time and I'll just
tell you when you get the chance
spend sometime with one of our
staff members who is also a
victim of random gun wells who's
been shot by a passing car and
the listen to his experience
sometime too so thank you for
letting sure those lobster
rations to Senator you and I do
not want the right what the same
thing and I don't mean to rain
on all of our pre today because
this has been an incredible
the presentation I'm gonna go
back to these notes and I'm
gonna remember what you all said
but it's not like it's over it's
not like we're done with it
we've got to get a handle on
this and I just implore all of
you to do even more than what
you're thank you Mr Senator
Moores and then Senator yep of.
We're gonna we're gonna we're
gonna try here couple more bill
so be precise keep the.
Precise Mr chair no doubt no
doubt s'mores with Senator
Stewart on that server story one
of the toughest broads I know so
they're just scared of you.
all at all joking aside and and
and Mr you know the this I'm
gonna encouraging you the made a
comment early Mr secretary that.
This about you would all tell
doctors what to do this
legislation to help drive what
to do all the time without
consulting them and to the
judgment of health care in the
state and so I'm gonna
encouraging you because the
quote then pro tem is lies damn
lies and statistics and we just
heard is from Mark Twain we just
heard that the same people who
gave us this in the statistics
are writing a bill so I'm gonna
encourage you to continue this
process of working on self from.
From yourself because I had some
questions I was going to ask
about statistics
and chief you just jumped the
gun and these are the questions
was going to ask you are you
pointed out we're number one in
violent crime on top of
everything else and then I was
gonna ask how many
attacks on cops and there have
been recent because I'm tired
hearing from the cops that's a
six fold increase on tax a tax
on just state police officers Mr
chair chief was just with that's
that use was that was that all
cops are just state cops.
Mr chair of center more that was
a state police.
And obviously you don't have in
front of you would you you're
assuming that the attacks on
farming tune our share of is not
just had a PDD KPD is
experiencing the same kind of
multiple fold increase on cops
and I see the secretary Mr chair
residents and.
Mr chair Senator Moores the
CENIC in the city Rio Rancho
we're there twenty seven years
and within the last year
specifically we went we went
probably twenty years of having
three optional shootings and
twenty year period maybe three
this year and I have responded
out to the scene of a at least
two of those and they were
exactly that one was a of soul
motor vehicle the public parking
lot of Walmart officers approach
to try to confirm the driver
driving out shot the officers
returning officer involved
shooting
there was another instance same
thing provided reader indicate
is the only will come in city an
easy time of day where you pull
over a stolen motor vehicle and
it was is that we will go to
jail for still more vehicle the
only witness or shoot out police
now they came into the city
lastly we are indicated as such
that was stolen car inner city
officers tend to make contact a
suspect rammed brand the police
cars there and with the officers
and and it turned to natural
shooting so the assaults and
home police officers is
certainly up I just had one this
last week it's in the news I
haven't fully been briefed on
that yet but
you know I don't know not sure
the outcome I I can Mr chair
just expand that for a minute I
think sometimes people believe
that like we're investigating
around there for nothing good
will happen religious covering
up and slipping into the carpet
and when you look at a lot of
these agencies for the New
Mexico state police as an
example they respond out to just
about all of the agencies in
rural areas of New Mexico to
help with that in the event of a
ciation and we look at in the
Albuquerque area alone there's a
multi agency task with the
response and and sitting right
over there of the the major
under the major income currently
the the she was part of
Albuquerque police department
previous to to working for the
chair for and I believe you were
on the that task force as well
you're getting officer respond
for the medical state police
Bernalillo county AP Rio Rancho
they're all responding to the US
role shooting so the believe
that somehow all these officers
and we have thirty one showing
up as seen some are going to
cover up for the one guy from.
You know for whatever agencies
is that that far around is
really it's it's a bridge which
you for W. that's that's
accurate and so what ends up
happening is that they also up
to this returning shows up to
that of the initially have a
briefing they can probably
explain more the the exact of
that are going on the task force
only as a command officer of
overseen and then they get
initial briefing on the scene
they all been going to get
paired up with other agencies
twelve campuses they go out into
the interviews in pairs I mean
there's a lot of oversight is
provided in those optional
shootings and so if there's
concerns for the number of
office real shootings and if
they were appropriate and with
the outcome there's a threat is
not oversight in the of course
they then go before the they
don't draw conclusion other than
goes to the district attorney's
office for the jurisdiction and
they reviewed even further and
so there's a tremendous amount
of work that's being done to
make sure that there is
impartiality from all the
different agencies and oversight
in those optional shoot.
Thank you Mr Mr chair a need
for.
Just to kind of take what you
it's at Farmington last January
about January ninth at an
officer shot it was the first
officer shot in Farmington more
than thirty years
he's investigating a D. W. I.
and the suspect flees the
officer approaches amount fourth
season walking in the area once
he realizes the officers going
to at least detained in to
figure out of these involved he
pulls out a gun shoots the
officer the officer was able to
get his elbow up in front of us
had the gun was aimed at his
head hits the oval incapacitates
the officer to strong arm
unfortunately the suspect took
off and and fled he was an
escape on from across the border
in Colorado that it escaped jail
we definitely did see an uptick
in violence towards our officers
in that that being easily the
the most significant one for us
hugely dramatic in even for
apartments city.
Mr chair sure.
Mr chair
Senator Morris
But the I can tell you is in
Senator Stewart.
I don't like those numbers at
all but here's here's the
sobering truth in.
I'm tired of an account to be
invalid also.
Doing everything I can as way.
Russia may major Anderson back
here we're looking at every
policy and procedure everything
that the gate use of force and
deadly force as a last resort.
But I'm also looking and looking
at all the stats in Bernalillo
county itself not just with
organized retail theft and auto
theft and I hate to tell you
this but as were violating these
policies to make sure that we
negate uses of force I guarantee
you can see violence towards our
officers and I can guarantee you
we do a search we will see
probably uptick in deputy
involved shootings that's a
sobering truth or seen it
forever when we do a search
because we are number one in
violent crime and Bernalillo
county we're not dealing with
people who want to cooperate
with us we are looking.
Also to make sure as were de
escalating tech tech with these
violent criminals that we're not
having utilized in the force but
I guarantee you we will have to
use force we're not gonna be
able talk these people out of
the vehicles all the time we're
not gonna be able to yell at
them until the stop ramming
their vehicles and trying to run
over our officers we talked
about talisman in front of me to
where yes we don't place herself
in the path of a fleeing vehicle
but I guarantee with the
techniques we use and certain
hot spots that are in the
Burnley County area right now we
will see an uptick in our use of
force but what we also need to
do is evaluate what we're doing
and seeing how we improve and
evolve again like I said earlier
this is a living document and
every time even I want to speak
for the chief when I was on the
Mr task force unit when the
state police comes in
Albuquerque to do a surge I tell
my detectives get you're not
asleep because it's about to get
busy there's nothing we can do
about that right now when we're
dealing with violent crimes
we're going to probably see it
become worse until it becomes
better but in the meantime we do
to multi task and make sure that
our policies and procedures are
on tap and we're always
evaluating or sell for best
practices but it's just a
sobering news and that I'm going
to be truthful with you
interrupt you sheriffs are more
still has the floor we followed
by Berlin we've got a couple
bills two years so thank you Mr
alright wrap up you know I I
just a personal it's open almost
thirty years but I was shot at
coming home from work but I
Regis after I was in college
some people I don't know just
drove up by by my truck and
split six rounds in my truck the
nose going on about so a person
or the bang bang bang will come
I went on to say guy with a gun
pointed in my face as you there
were going by hoc our group of
folks luckily I doc is one of
the bill said Rep Heimer my
truck was for my head was
so I would've been there to
district I want to be in here
and I'll talk about that a lot
because it's emotional.
So I have sympathy for what you
guys do and I just wanted to say
thank you Secretary chief chief
sheriff major Montoya are some
sergeant future Montana
and all the men and women here
in uniform in the building thank
you I appreciate you all.
Number of.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the The presentation thank
you for being here I I just
wanted to touch a little bit I.
In the past been able to see
body cam footage of when police
officers did.
The perfect job when I know
myself would probably not have
been able to maintain my cool
and you know I think we need to
see more of those body cam
videos and and find a way that
when we do see those how do we
get that in into the public
service officer right here's
just doing it the exactly how we
want to do it and then spend as
much time and effort digging
into those as to what training
was it why did it work where did
who who trained him and and dig
into that part of it find the
positives and really working to
it because they're out there
there's staff on how many
interactions police officers
have in the in the evening times
just in a small sleepy town like
Farmington of peaceful place to
live the sister city of Roswell
you know it's it's a high number
and they're able to do a great
job almost all the time and so
I've seen those videos it gave
me a great sense of pride just
seeing those with our also
police department and sheriff's
officers going you know these
young men and women that are
being are able to go to this is
that there is some training
that's working there are some
things that you all are doing
that are are working in
fantastic and and you know I
think we sometimes we forget to
to give you a Pat on the back
whenever you're doing something
right and so I do appreciate you
being here we can always do
better but if I I would like to
see some of those numbers to of
the interactions when when these
videos are brought forward and
it comes come to find out that
whoever made the complaint about
an officer
not treating them how they
thought they should be treated
comes out that while they
actually.
Did way better than that most of
us would have and see those
videos as well but unfortunately
the news is is for profit entity
and so whenever police officers
are doing a good job that
doesn't make the news
so you know as as citizens and
individuals we need to see as
well but again I'll echo the
sentiments of Senator Moores
appreciate you I don't know how
you walk up.
On some of these vehicles and do
what you do
and and very thankful for for
what you do
I know that something that
we all take for granted I think
a citizens out of stops and
interactions that you have
thankfully recently our sheriff
in Travis county is putting has
been putting a lot of the stuff
on Facebook
and so I know for me I was I've
just been amazed by how much is
going on that we used to just
like to be ignorant of and so to
see how much they are
interacting with people and are
doing I think is a positive and
and that's working well within
Chavis county so I I think no
not not maybe that's not what
what you all want to do or have
a policy of that but I know
that's working just in our our
small communities and it's
really helping build that
confidence back in the citizens
with the police and knowing what
they're going through and what
they're doing so but I
appreciate Mr chair having this
discussion bringing bringing
this forward because we will be
seeing a different things in the
near future in a moving forward
this is going to be a topic that
we're going to be working on and
trying to find the best
practices and working together
collaborative collaborative Lee
to do what's best for the public
and serve the public appreciated
thank you Senator so
I'm about to breach one of the.
Long standing in most important
rules of the legislature which
is to discuss.
What happens in the democratic
caucus which is an inviolate
rule we are not supposed to ever
discuss what is discussed in the
caucus and we.
It was the governor to so
But all but and I'm looking at
the the tension on the
president's of the Senate's face
but but I'm I'm I'm simply going
off for this one of the topics
of the caucus was the fact that
Senate judiciary doesn't hear as
many bills as it should be
hearing and just spending time
maybe doing other things than
hearing bills and you'll forgive
me for violate that rule to say
that I think this committee we
keep you all here another
several hours constructively and
productively and I'm I'm I'm
happy about that in and I wish
we could do that I have a
obligation to hear at least one
bill Center souls will hear your
bill but there's important work
done listening to each other and
and taking these opportunities
and so thank you all I I'm I
apologize to the the chief that
he thought he was coming in here
to get right over the coals.
the and and two there are no new
sheriff let me acco the the
comments to you we we look
forward to this being a new day
and and really I encourage all
of you to approach me into
approach all of the members of
this committee anytime that you
have a topic or a suggestion for
a similar dialogue that you
think would be constructed
because we we we we really do
have your back that's our goal
here is to have that you should
have that very clear from the
presentation today this is not
about putting on long force in
all of this adds a couple of
things one is that the crime
omnibus bill that we passed did
have a provision for a database
to keep track of of officers
terminated in the circumstances
for the termination of that part
of the crime omnibus bill was
stripped on the Senate floor
and I look for to bring that
back I think we think we need to
renew that but it was in there
and and we know we made a
decision for for any number of
different reasons take that out
but but that's that's not an
issue that we should abandon and
I I'm here today the importance
of doing that again so you know
you'll have our commitment to
doing that as well too and the I
hope with that will take
advantage of your invitation
chief there were there was a
terrific presentation we had at
your tier category to see that
the escalation techniques in the
procedures and training that
you're going through so again I
wanna thank committee members
for some very insightful
questions and the other for two
other good ideas for similar
hearings between now and the end
of the session thank you thank
you very much Sir we have one
bill that we're going to hear
I'm not seen Senator Diamond or
Senator Woods on Senate bill one
ninety nine I announced
previously we will not hear
Senate bill sixty three Santo
Tom and will will we will hear
only fair.
Please Los to continue with our
work well we'll hear only Senate
bill one seventy.
Senate bill one seventy is a
bill that has passed this
committee previously I believe
Senators goals that right so we
should be able to resolve this
of bill I think quickly.
Twenty of.
With that.
Bill.
We do.
All right Senator souls.
Thank you Mr chair I don't know
after that introduction that
they don't rather be here
listening to the other stuff the
listing and whether that the
kills my bill or not this
actually came last session from
an NPR article that talked about
the point and Mr chair you
always talk about how important
it is that we fully fund the
courts make sure the courts are
functioning well and when we are
paying our jurors at the minimum
wage.
We and people who have been in
trials know that everybody's
trying to get out of jury duty
some of it because it's a
financial hardship for them to
be there but minimum wage
doesn't cut that what this does
is fairly simple we is it raises
the wages for the compensation
for jury duty from the highs
prevailing minimum wage two
hundred fifty percent of the
greater of the federal minimum
wage or the state minimum wage
so it will go up with minimum
wages go up but it make sure
that we are continuing to
recognize the important job that
jurors do within our legal
system and make sure that more
people don't try to get out of
jury duty just because it's a
financial hardship for they're
only going to be getting minimum
wage currently the minimum wage
in New Mexico is twelve dollars
an hour it would raise it up to
eighteen dollars an hour as I
looked at the fiscal impact
report currently in a these are
the acronyms I'm not as
comfortable with but the
administrative office of the
courts indicates there is enough
money currently in that funded
through twenty twenty five the
the estimate here is it's a
little less than a million
dollars a year in order to do
this hopefully this would help
with some of some weight behind
getting additional funding for
the courts through the general
fund over the next couple of
years because this will work
towards depleting that but it's
an important part of maintaining
a strong judicial system is
having.
Jurors that want to be there
that are trying to get out of it
at every possible thing and with
that I'll stand for questions
thank you members the committee
with questions s'mores
cervicogenic what happens this
bill archer and we pass a last
year.
Mr chair and senator Lester was
a short session it was about
halfway.
I'm sorry.
Because it has appropriation was
last year and it was very short
session I'd heard the article
probably about a day or two
before the deadline for filing I
filed it so we start talking
about it but it just ran out of
time Mr chair and just this more
question to you all is on the
only long border I guess Senator
came back so if you do if you do
the increasing you have one of
these charts are cases that go
on hours upon hours and they're
deliberating the lifetime and a
half for going over time as of
and I don't know how to how does
that work do they get like if
there there were there for over
forty hours we can going into
eighty hours a not only this
increase but are they getting
time and a half overtime pay and
all that stuff you guys know.
They may not.
I don't think any of us of the
infants in order for it Mr chair
and Avent someone and this is
probably about ten years ago
when I was on a case that went
well more probably it was over
we can probably we're there
sixty hours that no there's not
time and a half for overtime I
would expect so I don't think
that this falls under what it
says is that the judges are
pretty good about making sure
that the jurors about five
o'clock the lawyers in the queue
though to prevent that.
Extra hours you.
For more savings chairman the
committee question Senator Ivey
Soto hi I have a question about
facial.
And what the actual amendment.
And and that is because I do
note that there are higher local
minimum wages.
And and so there are some places
of the state for a hundred
percent of the state minimum
wage.
maybe around the minimum wage
for that particular locality.
and some wondering whether.
There are page one
online twenty one.
After.
The first iteration of the work
well we were to strike the rest.
And say how to fifty percent of
the.
Minimum hourly wage rate set.
By federal or state law for by
the laws of the county or the
municipality.
In which the port is situated
whichever is highest.
Mr chair and senator I guess I
would not like that particular
Mennonite to get money said I
think it makes it more difficult
and it makes it harder to
administer because there are
different minimum wages across
the state it was discussed
during drafting when we first
drafted it last year about
whether we should have multiple
different rates and things of
that sort and was determined
this was a much simpler way and
by having the greater the
federal if by chance the federal
minimum wage jumps over New
Mexico's minimum wage that would
then become the wage for this
particular situation
I don't disagree with what
you're saying but I think that
makes it cumbersome and I don't
think that that that enhances
the bill much it makes it much
more difficult to determine what
it's going to cost each year and
in the various other things that
they that have to happen by the
mystery of off of the court
office of the courts to make
sure that it's funded.
I was chairman given the.
I have a side by the committee
member to my right.
I will I will
Yeah but you're you're not
within striking distance of the
she's about to.
Yes what you're withdrawing news
I will I will I will I will I
will not proceed to with the
other committee questions
comments senator Morris thank
you Mr Mr speaker Sir I'm going
support you remember if you want
to put it back on it because
Senator souls we have employees
in Santa Fe Los Alamos Los
crucis and Rossell in
Albuquerque.
Private sector has to do what
you just said was the gap exam
reason that use the proposed
this amendment.
We have to do is as a small
business and it is tough you are
absolutely right it is tough but
we have to do if it's good
enough if you all and the
legislature make us do it as a
small business you should make
government to it as well because
they have a lot more resources
to get things done.
Then put it on our backs as a
small business so it's only fair
for gonna require of us and all
small business owners of the
government also do it so I
support your amendment
wholeheartedly because maybe the
government needs to feel the
pain that small businesses fail.
So more thank you for the
comments there is not an
amendment for the committee I
move this ammendment Mr chair
of.
Before we were even bothers to
re stated is there a support for
the amendment and the besides
center Moores.
All right seeing none that
amendments to feed.
Senator with do passed motions
there any further committee
questions or comments and want
to cut off debate.
I'd sing then is there any
objection to do pass motion so
Morris.
All others so I've been asked to
state the vote count with them
to continue this practice but I
always Center every soda Senator
etcetera do Senator Wirth and
Senator bond is one of the
affirmative senator Morris
voting in the negative the has
to pass thank you very much
thank you and thank you for
opening I had announced earlier
that we.
This is
a very.
The.
So.
Thank you Mr.
Quickly.
We're trying to bring about a
law.
It says the theft of more than
one KO would be a greater crime
than if they have to just one
cap.
Now we look at it it is the idea
that this is a livelihood from
someone in a you now this is it
says no you can't do that
because if you still too many
cabs it would be unfair
punishment under the law.
It takes quite a
rustler.
Additional twenty counts.
It's not an easy thing done they
have to have premeditation to do
such a thing they have to have
equipment to do such a thing.
I know what you're going to tell
me I think.
But I want you to think about
what you want to tell me think
about how you might and then
this to be more equitable to a
rancher.
That loses several head of
cattle.
And
there's been times in feedlots
and the you've probably heard
the stories when.
Large feeding operations.
Had pay for cattle for fed and
so and it was a huge crime.
And it broke some people from
from
I have that happen I don't have
those specifics which you can
see you have multiple head
stealing can be
a huge more crime than a single.
Felony are facing of Los.
So with that Mr chair that's the
crux of it.
I'm ready for that the drill
down.
Mr Chairman since the nineteen
hundreds is nothing that could
put a cattle rancher out of
business faster than cattle that
so I'm happy to sit beside my
favorite couple here and
advocate for tougher penalties I
think there's a little bit of a
difference since then stealing
any other property and that is
one that this property is what a
person makes entire livelihood
off and I also think it's
important to to realize that
often times it's a little bit
different because these crimes
often involve of a firearm and
so it's a little it's a danger
out there when you come across a
counties on your property and so
for many reasons we're just
asking for stricter penalties
state of Texas they just
recently finished since to
gentleman for thirty seven years
from multiple cattle thieves and
so I just it just to highlight
the awareness out there and and
discourage people from from
stealing from our farmers and
ranchers.
All right three.
For the.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you so members I so it would be
a simple Senator Woods that
percent of your total of twenty
head of cattle we get sixty
years under this which is to
live census The New Mexico
I I'll be I'll be interested to
see what amendment Senator Ivey
Soto offers but I I can't
support itself as of this.
yes I was able to confirm this
we have already registered to
speak in support opposition
parties Sanchez this
is a this meeting which is the
C. right so all right of center
right so like I saw Senator
before use and more support for
the V. like you for.
Let's just those are the.
very center I.
The for service so Mr chair and
the.
Well.
So there was a certain amount so
I first of all I know that there
is no.
Definition of the livestock in
this section.
I looked throughout the rest of
the program code find out how it
defined livestock livestock
means and one section.
Can I of course is built codes
wind and Representative types.
What is the right type of Mister
chairman Senator what's.
Representative tied is I'm
pretty sure it is like a.
The farm.
L. court informed.
Here is what I think they're
talking about is the ones that
try not to jump over the fence.
They of actually.
It it's a very tight.
Rain.
On those game forms on how they
can do it in New.
you talk about financing you
know you see in the high
efficiency and we can discuss
financing if you want I know
that Senator Stewart and I have
discussed the thing a lot.
But I.
Unless you have other questions
I potentially change the last
October sometime back for those
definitions yeah and well and
and and Mr hunt and Sir what's
it up in another place of the
criminal code.
Livestock there means all
domestic and domesticated
animals that are used or raised
on a farm or ranch and exotic
animals in captivity and
includes forces **** mules
cattle sheep goats swine by
bison book poultry.
Ostriches demons.
Riess camel is.
We're going to point so it does
reading well so first of all
might my point is we don't know
what left means in this section
sorry existing yes it is already
existed we don't really know
what the up.
Let's talk means however but if
it means poultry.
As as demonstrated here there's
a I think there's a big
difference between someone who
steals twenty Katelin someone
who steals twenty baby checks.
and and and so.
Up in that regard what I have to
recognize that I and I have the
benefit so
Representative this L. Sanchez
introduced the same bill.
And I have the benefit of
actually sitting in the house
agriculture committee with a
talk about this and.
but it's it's up and and so I
recognize that her preferences
we go back to what the statue
originally provided which is
heading for wrestling.
But that's not an option
however I do agree that there's
a problem.
But I think the problem is
solved by the rest of our
citizenship.
Which has.
A greater penalty based on the
values.
Of what is still.
And if we were to go on program
apparently based on the value of
what is.
Then we could we could properly
that distinguish between the the
penalty that somebody should
get.
It should they should they still
twenty coming eight I think.
Versus what they would get if
they were that still twenty.
by Senator recap to the chair
that we will be ready for a vote
on this bill this evening
senators I encourage you to
spend endless hours with senator
I.
Rural rural the majority of your
session but there was go ahead
one quick question yes Sir.
So the appetite of the committee
sounds like we need to try this
more to value.
Then head that David had numbers
because of.
Having all these different
animals in the last up code even
though the particular case that
was quoted.
Specific to livestock.
So evidently that judge
recognized account instead of a
ticket.
Alright I'm a I see that maybe
the law is not blind so I will I
will try to mend Sir I would not
be allowed I would not want to
be presumptions to speak for the
committee as a whole you heard
only from Senator Ivy Soto so
far.
Well it's right center doing as
well to I encourage you to spend
a little bit of time perhaps was
similar centers I don't believe
we're ready for a vote on this
bill tonight if I if we were to
take a vote to be inclined to
table the bill in its present
form.
Of also not to reveal too much
of our Senate caucus discussion
but you know the the the old
days used to be on this
committee your bill's up or down
in its present form without
trying to spend endless time
trying to fix it committees
morphed into that body in the
want to rethink that whether we
want to continue to do that or
not but I got the right now and
I think that if if we were to
proceed to a vote and I think
there be tabling motion I think
the tabling motion would prevail
and and I think that we might
send the wrong message to to I
got that right here yes of so so
how about we have always spent
time working on it right thank
you thank you for your insight
is a large flightless bird.
An officer during the meal and I
was told that we did not hang
for rustling it was a hundred
lashes and hard labor under the
current we're our reserve before
we recess well this mystery says
in a committee with reference
moms or in Reese.
