It will be Senate bill sixty
six.
We give me just a second here.
Emily I'm looking at the.
Let's see.
All right so I will tell you
that there is.
In support of the Senate sixty
six which is the bill here at
first.
Senator souls.
You'll you'll identified those
who you consider to be part of
your organized support and and
and I'll leave it to you to to
organize those and present those
as you wish with in your time of
those who do not get the chance
to speak I will recognize your
name and the organization which
you representative for purpose
of the hearing today otherwise
it's for the sponsor to order
organize his presentation would
there if there is organized
opposition.
To the bill I have.
According the committee
secretary eight people within
that ten minute opposition that
means each one of them are
probably gonna get one minute
anyway if they all want to be
heard and then and then there
are probably another fifteen or
twenty individuals who oppose
the bill and all know their
names and organization in
opposition.
All right Senator schools
although the time is one fifty
two we'll hear Senate.
Sixty six.
Thank you Mr chair Senator sixty
six demands The New Mexico
banking installment loan act in
the small lone Act SB sixty six
is a governor endorsed priority.
The economic and business side
of this bill was thoroughly
debated in Senate tax business
and transportation we will focus
more on the legal side.
Thirty six percent with the log
in New Mexico from nineteen
forty seven to nineteen eighty
one when the hyperinflation to
the country was cited for
removing all of the cats.
When I was in college I took a
business law class a major
portion of the losses on usury
laws I remember clearly that the
maximum interest that could be
charged with eighteen percent
this is when the nineteen
eighties when interest rates in
the country were spiking states
including New Mexico that have
been operating for years with
legal caps removed those caps on
the usury what's since then
state by state it has become
clear that state laws to cap
interest rates have been in the
public interest.
This bill returns to the thirty
six percent cap of the past and
I might note that the US
military caps interest at thirty
six percent as a matter of
national security for all active
duty military and with that I
would like to turn it over to
Karen Myers I believe she should
be on or to make a few short
statements.
Karen Myers on yes I am.
If you would please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Karen
Myers on the internet and
consumer turning level kirke I
was head of the consumer
protection division at the New
Mexico attorney general's office
for eight years and after that I
worked at the consumer financial
protection bureau in Washington
as head of the office of
enforcement strategy and policy
team on a bank centers schools
and senator do hate for
sponsoring this bill.
Well established law that states
have the authority to set and
cap interest rates on landing in
the state to the final restrict
the types of laws loans allowed
to be made to specify the law
terms for those loans what the
small loan act the bank
installment loan act both laws
that have been on the books for
decades to exactly that.
Other states have similar forty
to enact recaps for landing.
The primary mechanism to
challenges losses been primarily
through lobbying and public and
paintings by the industry
seeking state law changes.
Senate bill sixty six as drafted
at the cap includes all fees and
drugs and expand the entire
nation provisions to ensure that
it's tightly drawn and
enforceable so the bottom line
is that this is a policy issue
to be decided by the
legislature.
And then acting Senate bill
sixty six will bring New Mexico
in line with the military
lending act passed by Congress
in twenty six and two thousand
six and amended in twenty
fifteen.
In light of the ongoing pandemic
and economic crisis that New
Mexicans face particularly
individuals and families that
live paycheck to paycheck you've
left it at this point they even
have a paycheck right now it's
important to consider the high
cost of these loans and the
adverse impacts they have on our
communities and then Act
appropriates state policies to
regulate landing in New Mexico.
In preparation for my testimony
I want to let you know what I
have reviewed in terms of data
and research I reviewed the
financial institutions division
annual data for twenty eighteen
and twenty nineteen.
I've reviewed the federal
government's reports research
and rulemaking documents all for
the military lending act and for
the consumer financial
protection rulemaking I looked
at the ten K. for tunable
largest lenders in New Mexico
look at summary data from the
portfolio one letter lander
provided by an industry group
for a lender doing of work doing
business in New Mexico also
reviewed approximately nineteen
national or state level reports
and studies on high cost lending
I also looked at the samples to
point to loans from consumers
with loans of that were made
fifty one seventy five cap went
into effect.
We know that you can if you can
wrap up and then we'll we'll use
some for rebuttal that
afterwards.
Okay
The the what I'd like to just
have the committee reference is
the examples of loans under the
one seventy five percent cap
which shows that loans are being
made to people with an adequate
income to repay the loan it
shows the question loans are
being made in building refinance
on the same day the next loans
taken out and the second and
third loans used to pay off the
prior loan and it shows increase
that loading extension of the
terms of the loan to the
detriment of the borrower.
I have a lot more I can say but
I will stand for questions thank
you senator Senator Duhigg I
think you were going to
coordinate the proponents.
Yes and it looks like in Nick
Madison is on let's let's start
with with neck.
Members my name is Nick Madison
I'm a consumer protection
attorney in Albuquerque New and
before doing this work.
Can work out on the Navajo
Nation over the years I've
worked with hundreds of people
who were victims of predatory
lending and I continue to talk
to people frequently today we're
suffering the effects of their
families their health and their
employment from this type of
lending but the problem is the
currently under the law.
The New Mexico legislature has
given its seal of approval to
triple digit lending up to a
hundred and seventy five percent
and to give the committee a
sense of what that actually
means in practice my one of my
clients is Mrs P. whose consumer
number two on the handout that
was provided to.
What happened with consumer
number two Mississippi is that
she was disabled she was getting
by on an income of about a
thousand dollars a month from
social security living in Santa
Fe and she ended up in a series
of car title loans where she
provided the title to our car as
security for the loan.
This powerfully illustrates what
it really means to have triple
digit Lente cheaper six thousand
dollars but within a couple of
months she owed back about
thirty four thousand dollars
over four years and these are
going to be payments of about
seven hundred dollars a month
that's nearly three quarters of
her total income you can imagine
the crushing affected this kind
of debt had on on my client.
The legislature now has the
opportunity to change this in
the step in and make sure that
the people New Mexico are
protected.
Very soon you're going to hear a
lot of people from the industry
talking about how this these
sorts of loans are important for
access to credit remember these
number this is not about access
to credit this is about taking
advantage of vulnerable people
and I urge all of you to take
this advantage and this kind of
what thank you.
Thank you Mr mass and I Austin
we aqui.
You can make yourself and go
head for about one minute.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is Austin we
occm here on behalf of an united
vote we stand today in strong
support of SB sixty six because
we understand this is an issue
of equity we know that sixty
five percent of these lenders
are within fifteen miles of
tribal lands and will centralize
around communities of color poor
communities border towns and
areas with less access to good
financial literacy we understand
that the committee that the
committee has a choice between
consumer protection or
continuation of predatory rates
which permanently hinder the
economic mobility of those store
if we marginalize communities we
also want the committee to note
that we never made an agreement
to stop our work in ending
exported practices and have
always stood in support of a
thirty six percent APR cap
because this is proven to work
because a hundred and seventy
five percent is unjustifiable
to our communities and because
we owe it to New Mexicans to
pass meaningful legislation and
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you at Diane Gibson Santa.
Well Griego and we've got a
little bit credit unions have
supported the bill as well are
we are one of the credit unions
that does lead to people with
bad credit no credit I
documented so it is possible to
make affordable loans of two
people of New Mexico without god
you know what triple digit
interest rates are we specialize
in financial coaching but I
won't start as small as three
hundred dollars on up so we are
nowhere near the hundred and
seventy five percent we were
we're not even close to the
thirty six percent and we can
still make a profit and still
help people and during a time of
emergency part of the problem
with these loans is that they
also damage credit when people
can't keep up with the payments
so it keeps them in a borrowing
cycle with these types of
lenders and doesn't allow them
to move forward to messages
systematic barrier that keeps
low income populations from
building wealth and we feel that
our state could do better for
communities if there's any
questions out there for of this
type of lending you can follow
up with me after I know it's
limited time today but I do
appreciate your time of the
committee and chair thank you.
Representative talk about one
more one more up hostile.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee I'm
Paul Stalin the president chief
executive officer of the credit
union association of New Mexico
we serve about nine hundred
thousand New Mexicans a very
large portion of people in New
Mexico do business with credit
unions every day we believe that
this is a great bill because of
the fact we've been able to work
with the sponsors to create a
map that to allow the right to
float should interest rates go
up are that's important because
we know that it will allow the
small dollar loans at a
reasonable price to remain
available hi into the future no
matter what happens to interest
rates so we certainly praise the
Sanchez for working with us on
that issue we also would like to
make note of the fact that
credit unions and other agencies
stand by and are ready to make
these loans we've been told that
no one will be in this business
if this bill passes and that
just isn't true credit unions
are ready willing and able to
make the loans and I stand in
favor of Senate bill sixty six
thank you.
Thank you Mr still out and with
that Mr chairman we would like
to reserve I think it's about
four minutes left or rebuttal
after the opposition.
You're doing a good job of
keeping your time Senator you
doing date used eleven minutes
of your fifteen reserving for
for rebuttal.
For the opposition.
The Senate sixty six.
Just one moment here saying.
All right the number of
individuals identified as part
of the organized opposition Dr
Richard keys Andrew Morrison
Johnny Andrea Sachs David Emery
twenty Tanner Ramon Sanchez.
Mike McClellan the client sorry
and then probably twenty or
twenty five people also against
of the of the names I just
identified as during organized a
spokesperson to coordinate the
opposition.
Mr Chairman is looking at
apartments is also I think in
the waiting list federal court
she on our was waiting to get in
and out of the sides in
particular.
Hi I have read the list of
opponents is there is there an
organized spokesperson for the
opposition to Senate sixty six.
I don't I don't see anyone show
could be sure we have.
Otherwise I show two four six
eight W. in opposition each one
of you will have one minute in
that case you'll go with this
order Dr Ricky keys followed by
Andrew Morrison followed by John
now I hope I pronounce your name
correctly so Dr Ricky keys the
time is two oh five.
We were up we were actually
planning to find out time
differently.
but.
I think we have two minutes each
for the first two speakers.
That's fine I encourage you to
accept that organized so who are
the first two speakers and.
I think they are Dr cheese
myself so I'm happy to get the
order tickets can go first.
What the time is two oh five Mr
Morrison will begin with you you
are you.
You'll have you said to be two
minutes followed by a doctor
cues and then we'll percent from
their go ahead Sir twelve up to.
Members of the committee my name
is Sandra Marcin with project
management in serving lower
income families New Mexico for
twenty five years.
This bill use the times
entranced and APR into change
they are not the same eighty oz
or artificial construct
combining and annualized
interest representing a loans
variable costs and fees
representing its fixed costs
basically the lenders operating
expense fixed costs of the same
whatever the size of Lente the
pick of the loan the smaller the
role played by fixed costs in
the combined APR and the smaller
the APR that for any cap based
on AT also acts as a ban on
small about.
That's why while it may make
sense to cap both interest and
fees it is never right to cap a
Diaz the federal reserve says of
the break even loan for eleven
thirty six percent these two
thousand five hundred dollars we
were told one main makes lands
at thirty six their average loan
is eight thousand dollars so it
makes sense for them in the
prime part of the state so.
Not even connect makes eight
hundred thousand dollars most
banks started I but sixty two
percent of loans under the
existing will offer amounts
under one thousand dollars this
bill passes those loans
disappear.
So why not just borrow more than
you need to get a lower rate
the.
The big of the loan the lower
APR the lower the APR but the
higher the cost both in dollars
and as a percentage of the
amount.
When people talk about high cost
loans they really mean low cost
loans with higher rate yup
conversely lower APR loans have
higher costs eighty are caps do
not save people money they cost
the money and they keep them in
depth long I urge you to
preserve accessible low cost
credit people need and oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you doctor keys.
Mr chair Dr teaching not the
reconnecting.
I'm sorry one more time please
what again.
Actor keys
seems to be trying to connect
and not if you think and then
the used in the meeting that is
not connecting.
Is not connected because of
something on our end.
I don't think so.
All right for those that are
opposed to bill of one of you to
try and reach the.
Dr LFC.
I see somebody connecting and
walking I don't know that there
is Mr chair very close okay it
could be because he's walking.
Dr keys there you go to the
doctor you would recognize and
I've been advised wished to have
two minutes Sir.
Yes I
My name is Dr Ricky keys.
One second.
my name is Dr Ricky please.
I own and have developed an
educational platform that
provides money to education
coaching to minority
communities.
I've also done consulting work
for the National Blackhawks the
state legislators.
Over the past thirteen years I
work with the national Hispanic
caucus of state legislators.
In the CSL and Nobel women all
issues dealing with access to
credit.
As you know qualities to beam of
the by the straits.
And nothing concerns a group
that I work with more than and
an even distribution of critical
resources among various
communities and ethnic groups.
I've done studies on food
doesn't pharmacy that is
education guidance healthcare
doesn't and credit presents.
It is a fact that moderate
minority community suffered
because of these other even
distribution of available and
availability of these resources.
United Nations defiance hobby at
the lack of certain essential
goods and services including
access to credit.
You Mr I global microfinance
movement demonstrates that while
handout sheets dependency
barring to to contabilidad
responsibility and the and is
the only effective pathways out
of poverty.
I agree with you charitable
trust that payday lending not
installment thing is the problem
and denying access to short term
small dollar loans can and will
be catastrophic.
If you pass this bill it has
been estimated that next on C.
forty six percent of all New
Mexicans will lose access to
safe affordable state regulated
credit.
I grew up in a poor neighborhood
myself I see what happens when
the only option for people are
bad options it's not pretty they
get trapped in a cycle of debt
and the lives get much worse
quickly in the state that is not
already the most of riches I
fail to see how promoting
legislation that reduces credit
access will improve citizens
opportunity to skate property
thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Opposition John John a line my
production incorrectly yes good
John I followed by an aspect
followed by David Emery Mr not
you have a minute and a half Sir
thank you I live in Santa Fe we
have three family owned lending
stores we've been in business
for nine years serving hundreds
of families.
We've never had a violation
which.
And eighty percent of our loans
are under one thousand dollars I
can tell you that thirty six per
capita cap is not financially
feasible for us and and not for
banks and credit unions and I
have documents from federal and
state programs we're.
Caps have failed at this level
and higher.
What happens is that the one
that is damaged most is the
person that wants to borough
small loan and time and time
again it is been one source it
takes over these markets as the
license lenders late.
And that is lenders that operate
off of sovereign land tribal
land and off shore.
And that they are unlicensed
unregulated internet lenders
they have no cap.
Rates start at three hundred
percent.
Our selection methods and no
state control.
To give you an example.
Point during summer lander from
the Chippewa Cree land in
Montana they advertise that they
have over one billion in loans
and one billion customers there
in Montana.
They advertise a loan of one
thousand dollars to twelve
months and three hundred forty
eight percent there's been very
little research done by the
sponsor or is experts or think
New Mexico the consequences in
states that have implemented
caps that are not financially
feasible thank you Mr.
I miss that.
Minutes please all right good
afternoon Mister chairman
members my name is honest that
came along with my husband
Norman said we only meant loans
in Taos New Mexico I was born
and raised in Taos and my
husband reside has resided here
for over twenty two years with
extensive work experience and
knowledge of finance been in
business for eleven years and
offer loans from five hundred to
fifteen in our community last
year in February I retired from
a local bank as a vice president
in the commercial and consumer
loan officer after twenty four
years of service during this
time I help numerous long time
customers will play for an were
denied loans our systems are
automated as most banks are now
our minimum loan amount was
three thousand Madam minimum
credit score of six sixty
anything lower than this even
with decent monthly income would
automatically be he declined
with no knowing no exception in
my experience nine out of ten
applications were denied we also
try to pilot program to end the
lower amounts and found that
these loans were not profitable
these loans also required to six
sixty minimum credit score I
would often referred tonight
loan customers to the credit
unions because I understood that
their credit limits in income
standards were less stringent as
those of a bank as it turns out
in order to get a get along with
the credit union you need to be
a member the definition of small
loans also greatly differs
depending on the institution
you're applying that credit
unions are typically a minimum
of two thousand and banking
institutions a minimum of three
thousand the majority of
customers that walk into our
store friends do not request
more would be qualified for
these loan amounts so in
rebuttal to the expert witnesses
who believe that banks and
credit unions would fill the
void left behind by installment
loan companies this could not be
further from the truth if we
were to believe this were true
installment loan companies never
would vote in New Mexico thank
you for your time and
consideration Mr chairman and
members thank you David Emery
for one and a half minutes.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is David Emery I am the New
Mexico regional manager for QC
financial I lived in our
beautiful state for twenty two
years New Mexico is my home this
is where I put down my roots
this is where I will retire I
love our state now if I could
please share an example with you
we have a customer named Andrew
he's a single father who
recently divorced Andrew found
himself in a position where you
need to purchase some
specialized medical equipment
for his daughter and replaces
hot water heater in this home
and you thought he had an ace in
the hole in order to be able to
use we borrow money but when he
was unsuccessful do is attempt
to borrow money from his
employer who by the way is a
major bank in the metro area
Andrew turned to us and we were
successful in helping Andrew now
if Andrew is able to borrow
money from the bank being an
employee of the bank how
difficult would you imagine the
situation be for all of our
fellow New Mexicans in these
types of situations we
understand it's important that
New Mexico needs to be cleaned
up and rein in the rogue actors
it's important that people like
and you have a safe efficient
and practical way to have their
needs met we need to see
financial will stand ready and
welcome conversations regarding
the future regulations thank you
for your time today thank you Mr
every twenty ten followed by
representatives twenty ten or
for one and a half minutes.
Mr chair Senator already been
almost eleven minutes.
One response for the time thank
you senator Senator.
Chairman does members of the
community good afternoon Tony
Towner owner Dan court finance
elected officials I have great
respect for you and your
willingness to serve put to work
for constituents customers if
you will ten years in office
you've obviously earned the
trust and respect of those you
serve and you build rapport with
many families in your district
twenty plus years very
exceptional service thirty plus
years few and far between Mr
chairman members of the
committee why would be so
different with the business
we're a small New Mexico family
owned business operating in
Gallup in Farmington since
nineteen eighty nine serving our
customers for thirty plus years
because we've earned that same
trust and respect service
providers members of the
committee I ask you to hold this
bill to work with Senator
schools to keep New Mexico
businesses open I did share
consumer protection thank you
thank you Sir Ramon Sanchez last
speaker one and a half minutes.
Mr chairman Reagan Sanchez
Representative consumer
installment lenders association
who have been operating in New
Mexico since long before I was
elected in seventy one and never
where they subject of
controversy they've been
providing services for over
fifty years to seven thirty six
percent APR all them all in will
have unintended consequences
it's possible that thirteen
hundred ninety five employees
will lose their jobs annual
salaries about forty six
thousand a year sixty five
thousand total compensation per
year six million company
employee taxes paid to the state
sixty million paid to landlords
and about nine hundred fifty
million in total economic
impact.
This can be avoided if we
proceed to agreement to the
agreement we had twenty nineteen
to face facts rather than
fantasy and rely on the data
being compiled pursuant to house
bill one fifty installment
lenders around twiddling to
payday lenders which were with
the Sportback clients eliminated
in twenty seventeen their
business models provide
transparency why take the chance
of economic loss to online on
regulated lenders for working
together in a fact based
solution to provide all parties
an opportunity to resolve our
differences thank you Mr
chairman thank you all right
that completes the time we've
set aside for opposition I'll
note that also is part of what I
was told was the organized
opposition was look McClellan
finance excuse me also
identified in opposition the
bill is magnet Meltzer a John
Martinez with us the peace on
loan hobby err I wound give me
Madam R. for access financial
services corporation Tom keepers
for CCI Hey Lori Begay for
branded you management company
Crystal Santiago's for checkmate
Melissa Santa for title cache of
New Mexico thank.
Kirk cook for Navajo trading
company Cathrynn group gross
yadda for all.
Take a sentence a true setter
for online lenders association
J. Santi on us for a ten court
finance David Pena for select
management.
Danielle are are low for
American financial services
association Jeff grabber for the
national installment lenders
association David Penney up for
select management resources Rep
Nathan for thank New Mexico
Norman Sachs.
And Kathy Elliott for rural
water association who Clint
harden and associates those are
the individuals who also
identified themselves with
opposition to the bill Senator
sold the reserve of four minutes
we'll go to five for a rebuttal
and then we'll go to the
committee center sold.
Your muted center.
Thank you Mr chairman of that we
all have played a game of being
muted or not.
First this is really important
point this is not about access
to crack at it.
It's about exposure did that so
let me say that again it's not
about access to credit it's
about does your did that if
companies can't afford to make
small short term loans they
should not be making those small
short term loans.
Because it puts people in
jeopardy if what's the house is
in jeopardy the card is in
jeopardy if with their families
in jeopardy because they have
been exposed to crashing that.
In this country we often promote
the myth that anybody can
succeed if they just have a lot
of grit and hard work and that
those in dire circumstances are
just not trying hard enough and
we know that's not the case we
encourage people to try to fix
the problems on their own rather
than seeking help high interest
rates on the loans at all and I
urge them to hang on a little
bit longer often just long
enough to start in the remaining
well out of the person.
So trapped by the question do
that they must ask for help from
a consumer protection nonprofit
if short term high interest
loans work available.
It would have more people
seeking help earlier before
they're forced deeper into that
that track.
There is not evidence.
From other places that this is
because and I think one person
says catastrophic.
This for people who don't have
access to credit it hasn't
happened many other states have
implemented these laws and what
it's done is it has gotten
people to get help with their
finances before they are so far
under water but they cannot
recover.
We must return New Mexico laws
to a thirty six percent all in
half of the very first speaker
used a bunch of financial mumbo
jumbo to talk about whether it's
interest and fees at how APR is
not APR is the standard measure
for what the cost of loans with
the that's what we need to go
back to I believe there's about
a minute and a half or two
minutes left and I would like to
have Karen my expert witness use
that last two and a half minutes
thank you madam Mr chair.
Thank you senator Mr chair
members of the committee I just
want to respond to a couple
points that were made one is if
you add up
Mr Sanchez's numbers it does not
equal nine hundred fifteen
million if you look at it so
quite a bit less of that if you
look at that in comparison to
the two hundred and twenty
million that of people pay every
year on average and fees other
net is approximately my estimate
is over a hundred million
dollars and that leaves mostly
leaves the state because eighty
five percent of the company's
are from out of state
also I'd like to remind the
committee that in the nineteen
eighties for the inflation
occurred there was a rate cap it
was thirty six percent and New
Mexico lenders made loans at
that amount I can expand on the
unregulated application around
tribal lenders but it's not
accurate state law does regulate
online generally federal law
regulates tribal lenders and the
goal here as senator schools so
aptly pointed out is to help
people whether of financial
instability not put them into
greater debt and I can address
the other issues if there are
questions and if there's time.
Thank you and I cosponsored
Senator Duhigg again there's
about a minute left.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator and and and I think that
the Santo souls and and this
Myers have have really addressed
it so I'm happy Mr chair if if
you would like I can I can
address the the amendment that
at this point that has been
presented to the committee are
to be before us before we go to
your amendment in the committee
let me do the same for the
proponents is a defer opposition
to recognize those who wanted to
know require their opposition
Paul Gibson for retake our
democracy Lindsey color for New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
Jacob Vigil Matthew mariachi for
prosperity works.
He can do with New Mexico legal
aid letter Gorman Office of
national and have national even
Rights Commission so be okay
thank
Shea and corona for center for
responsible lending Ryan Moore
ridge winner indivisible knob
hill.
Rigor Carla Cruz the center for
civic policy closely Jake for
New Mexico native vote Allen
Sanchez for New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
very ran for the city of Los
crucis Ellen white Sir for the
senior citizens office Richard
Greer for a a RP New Mexico and
Alexander Pickett but sorry all
right that completes our
presentation for applicants and
our opponents of the bill will
go to committee members I think
it would recognize their do it
first with the proposed
amendment Senator o'neill I
think you're Mike may be why
certainly paper you better go
I'm not entirely sure about that
there you go one of the larger
that Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee there was a
proposed amendment that was
yesterday afternoon this is a
largely technical amendment but
I will just run through it real
quickly and I I don't have the I
don't know that I have the
ability to share my screen but
perhaps if if Emily are ours in
Leominster can bring out great
thank you so much.
So.
What these amendments are doing
the first real substantive one
which is is number two which is
striking the language also and
applicable to expansion of
consumer credit that's closing
the potential loophole that that
might have existed for title
loans
as it was written.
The next two amendments which
are striking the word two
hundred placement with three
there's a portion of this bill
that just says that when the
that the overall interest rate
goes ten percent or more about
prime that and I'm I'm one of
the people who spoke talked
about this essentially that that
this are caps on interest would
float along with that in the
original bill it had said that
if that was happening for two
months then that float would
happen this is extending that
time frame to three months both
in response to a comment in the
committee analysis on this bill
and also just kind of thinking
about five quarters financial
quarters in the year as opposed
to a two month increments.
Going to number five and and if
we kind of scroll down a little
bit.
there was a portion of this bill
Ag and talking about those that
floating interest rate where it
it wasn't very clear whether
that interest rate.
Would apply to loans that had
already been made would only
apply to loans that are being
originated during that flow
period and and with that
increase interest rate continue
on to in loans the work we're
originate during that period so
the the purpose of this
amendments these two amendments
are not really just it's just
number five is to make clear
that if that increased.
Andrea happens during that SLO
period that that applies to the
loan for the life of the loan it
would not go back and part of
that is important because truth
in lending requirements of
federal law require that these
disclosures about interest rates
be given when the loan is
originated and and they are
sticking to them.
the next if we scroll down some
more.
There are so we're really taught
dealing with a couple of
different acts in this bill one
is the installment loan act the
other is the business loan act
and we wanted to make sure that
in the definitions to the
installment loan act that we're
staying consistent with some of
the existing definitions in the
business loan act so.
If you so in this change to
consumer under the installment
loan act that simply makes that
definition match the definition
of consumer in the business loan
act if we scroll down some more.
Thank you go and I the addition
of a debit authorization is put
in in the definition section for
the installment loan act because
that's that that's a term that
is used in this bill and and
just you know for good drafting
should be should be a defined
term awesome with prime rate of
interest in this is that rate of
interest that we're looking at
to see it when it's appropriate
to to float the interest cap I
to to reflect increased interest
rates nationally and so if if we
keep on scrolling down.
The rest of this is just keep
and stuff in context in this
change that we're making.
To the I.
That definition section you can
keep on scrolling.
All right then we get to.
To number nine here
originally this bill when
looking at what that prime rate
of interest was it had a it had
folks looking to
to the Wall Street journal which
I I was surprised to learn
that's actually something we do
it in a number of our statutes
but it but it seemed to make
more sense to make that the fed
rather than the Wall Street
journal because the fed is going
to be publishing that
information and that seems like
at a better source to include
there so that's the change
that's being made on number
nine.
Number ten it is just re
phrasing language to make it
clear it it makes a substantive
change
a court would still be able to
consider all factors relevant
it's just just saying it in a
more clear way number eleven
again as clues closing this
potential loophole for title
loans by taking this information
out because the the intent of
this bill is to apply to to to
all the small loans and so and
and what we've often found is
that not it's kind of a game of
whack a mole the people find
lots of ways to get around
regulations so we want to make
sure that we're any potential
loopholes that we can see off
the bat we're we're closing.
Twelve and thirteen this is the
same changes as mentioned above
changing it from two months to
three months when looking at
doing that floating I interest
rates because it's gone ten
percent above prime.
And then number fourteen.
Is again the same thing that I
was talking about above with
making clear that when we do
have that floating interest rate
it's going to apply it to if if
the loan is regimen originated
with the higher rate that's
going to continue apply to apply
to that loan for its entire term
and just because the prime goes
back down that does not mean
that the interest rate cap for
that loan would go back down as
well and then the last one is
just taking out severability
language that was in there
because it's a necessary we
there is a a law of general
applicability that I'm sure
Senator Ivy Soto has memorized
but I do not that this senseless
as at everything is operable you
you don't have a specific
language in there so that's just
a claim.
Mr chair you know if I might I
want to thank Senator Ivey Soto
his spent that probably hours
with Senator Duhigg going
through the technical changes
he's been very helpful in making
this bill as you started at the
beginning of more legally
correct and cleaner and smoother
and want to thank him for all
the time we put the and and also
that that saves your committee
time of happy to try to do all
of this with people putting
pages back and forth that you
all had a chance to see the
amendment of the twenty four
hours prior to the to this
meeting so that it would be a
little easier for everyone to
comprehend and understand so
thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator you're running amendment
in committee members on the
amendment Senator Ivey Soto all
recognize your next on the
Senator doing are you are you
done right now for an
explanation of the amend.
I am at less the committee has
questions about it I would move
the amendment at this time okay
before I turned it Senator Ivey
Soto on the motion I did want to
follow up on COVID center souls
made this amendment was you said
made available at least twenty
four hours before in my
questions less about the amount
of time how how are we how are
you or anyone making amendments
known available to either
advocates or opponents to
legislation are we doing that.
Mr chairman I I may have missed
poker or misunderstood we
completed the amendment it was
to the committee secretary with
the twenty four hours ahead of
time so that yeah we would be
available it would be something
where thanks for getting change
back and forth in real time with
the committee that was completed
right now.
So I'm sorry when was this
proposed amendment submitted to
the committee secretary.
Go ahead.
Mr chair it was sent to the
committee to the committee
yesterday actually I might have
even been the day before I then
separately sent out to the
entire committee and the
committee secretary I yesterday
at about one o'clock just to
make sure everyone had it but it
was said by alleged council
service to the committee either
Friday evening or are.
With Saturday Saturday evening
or or Sunday morning
In earlier today Mr legault day
is name I mispronounce
everything about was that
had asked me if it was fine to
to share with opponents and and
I asked him to to please go
ahead and do so.
Thank you and all all the dress
that when I speak on the bill
Senator Ivey Soto please.
Mr when I was just simply
Our our our back to center souls
for his comments also in terms
of what senator during set up
some ability I unless I miss my
guess it is sections well best
to a national.
Thank you.
Think of which were up to the
Legislative Council for some
reason the bills we very quickly
stripper right out we all of
that is the.
What.
Council meeting.
We are.
The.
We're going
along the law and we are.
Because of that.
Our.
Thanks to.
The most in that order Center
stored on the amendment no
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman so I
wonder if we could put the
amendments back up on the screen
for a moment.
So I just have a technical
question about the two
amendments that strike.
As apple Google to the extension
of consumer credit so if you
just go to that first one I
think it's on page.
Six set up there to.
It's too fast.
And it's with the top page six.
Mr chair up you know I think as
Myers can can speak to the the
loophole that this was seeking
to address better than I can and
so defer to her on this but Mr
chairman I am not on the
substance of the amendment.
I'm trying to figure out how
this actually reads in the bill
itself because what you're doing
is you're striking sure going to
have the calculation of the
permitted annual percentage rate
shell then it'll have one and it
will say include.
So.
I don't I don't see how that
reads unless you've done some
punctuation that six that.
And Mr chair Senator that is a
great catch we should have on
line seven we should have which
which I've included the word
include they're at the end of
line seven after shall and
before the call and and then
just taken out lines eight nine
entirely and and I think that
would read remember clearly.
Yeah and you've got it twice
it's the same problem in both
places.
I can Mr chair Senator I can I
can quickly type up a spend
management to this amendment to
to use to fix that your just
change that if we possibly can
so I'm just surprised that
Senator Ivy Soto agency that is
so shocking.
Mr chair Senator at that that
one's probably on me.
One second center stories of the
for.
Well I'll certainly yield to
Senator Baca if she is on this
point.
It is on that point if you if
you include the word including
online seven it might conflict
with item number three online
twenty one.
Once.
Mr chair Senator you're right
you're right I I was.
That that is a good point so in
that situation even though it
would look very strange just
have one include and then sub a
and set B. B. underneath that.
I think that that would actually
be better even though it looks
odd to do so because.
Because we're not saying that
the everything under all the
subs are included
Mr chair Senator Duhigg
committee confirm that.
miss more you're not yet
recognize we're gonna go gonna
go through the chair.
Members don't have the authority
to recognize those out.
In the audience you will.
Senator Senator you still have
the floor though and where did
you yielded to Senator Baca.
So.
I mean I I don't want to word
Smith this myself right here you
could have include with of
finance charges and then and and
include charges under the but
then that sort of doesn't make
sense I don't want to work Smith
that I'm just telling you it
doesn't work the way it is right
now and I agree was Senator Baca
about then it messes up the the
verb in a number three so I mean
this this whole thing with
include or not include or follow
sort of doesn't make sense to me
but the amendment really doesn't
make sense so that's it I'm
relinquishing the floor.
This Mr Johnson what services
and they got lost reflect and I
apologize when we talk about.
Mr chair Senator this is talking
about amendment number two which
is on the first page of of the
overall enrollment looking to
page six lines eight and nine
and then there's a second
amendment that does the same
thing.
It is.
On page thirty two line six and
seven.
Thank you.
And.
Mr chair Senator if you don't
mind we can we can be kind of
figuring out that correct
language in the background
If other people have have
comments.
Going to I I don't want to hold
anyone off that hold anything up
while we're figuring this out
we're still on the amendment
it because of the view that I've
got right now I'm what I am
seeing only the proposed
amendment let's see on the
screen I'm look I was going for
any other committee members wish
we recognize on the amendment at
this time.
If there if there is any
committee member we should be
recognizable commercial hands or
thank you or four hundred just
to jump in on the Mike anybody
on the amendment.
Anyone else.
Senator Pirtle in centre block
on the amendment etcetera.
Good welcome yes yes you do what
we're gonna do once already
center Baca that someone Center
Pirtle but unless there's a beef
between you guys want to take
outside we'll go with Senator
Pirtle and center Baca.
He was on on that point but my
questions pretty simple is not
with anything technical it was
mentioned that the amendment was
sent out to opposition
or to industry
Who specifically was sent to us
kind of a central area I'm gonna
keep the tax from from people
that said they haven't seen the
amendment prior to the meeting
so just curious
who who it was sent to.
Mr chair Senator perhaps Mr
other guy Dick and can answer
that.
I receive that this morning and
I sent it to all committee
members plus all of the analyst.
Okay thank you Mr chair I I
thought I'd heard during the
presentation and the minute that
it was sent out to.
The amendment was sent out to
Industry so I'm just curious who
that was.
Right now.
Senator Baca.
Sorry Mr chair is still waiting
for Senator Senator Pirtle
outside but he never came out.
What I know since Senator Moores
for me he'll be he'll be my my
proxy I think it worked out.
Thank you.
Mr chair I was just going to
offer an amended amendment Mr
chair to Senator Duhigg to just
correct that grammatically so we
could move on if that be okay.
They're back together for you
can propose the amendment that
of senator do it wishes to amend
our motion taking into account
your amendment the amendment
that'll be that'll be taken by
the chair so you want to want to
propose it.
Thank you Mr chair so money then
it would start on if we take
into account Senator to Mexico
in current amendment online
eighty nine to approve as
applicable to the extension of
consumer credit and it would
strike open and closed loop in
parentheses eight close
criticisms strike also line
twelve open parentheses being
close parentheses making the
final to say.
Include by finance charges as
defined in twelve CFR part ten
twenty six known as regulation
Z. and the remainder of what was
formerly section be.
Just just have a number one with
all of that minus the sub A. and
so be.
And Mr chair Senator Baca I I
think that works but but if you
don't mind I'd like to just
check with our expert miss Myers
to see if if there's there's any
reason that what she believe
that those.
A and B. for centers needed to
be separated.
Miss Mister chairman may I
respond.
Ms Duhig agency do you have the
flu of the floor.
Enrollment center Senator Baca.
The the refer to center do
except do it go ahead.
I think that would be fine I
think that is certainly one
alternative the other is just at
the board and after included the
following in either approach I
think which is the same result.
It Mr chair Senator Baca that
being the case I I think that
that your suggestion is a good
one and and that would be a
friendly amendment to this
ammendment.
Senator Baca use of force
The amendment to the amendment
and.
Mr chair.
Is anybody clear on the
amendment.
Norman also for that.
Senator Senator Duhigg has said
you support the amendment as
well is that right I have Mister
chair yes I do and and just just
for clarification thank this
would be an amendment on both
page six and on page there
thirty two where that same
languages there so we would be
making the same changes change
in both places.
Well the proposed amendment to
your amendment so we'll we'll
take that matter first up Center
Bacchus proposes center box are
the more Meuser.
Thank you Mr chair sponsor.
Right.
On the amount on the amendment
to the amendment let's stick it
in that order is there any
objection to that amendment.
Senator Baca meminta Center do
examine.
Thanks seeing none will adopt
the Baca amendment.
We're back to Senator do ex
amendment as amended by Senator
Baca.
Other questions on the amendment
before the committee.
The chair seeing no one else on
that amendment.
I have I.
I feel it's important for me to
make a suggestion to this
committee but of course the will
of the committee will prevail.
I'm concerned that.
I was advised before the
committee that we had an
amendment but I would chose a
relatively simple amendment act
I gotta tell you I I don't
consider it to be as simple
amendment number one.
Difficult for me to help you
understand to be chairman of the
meeting and managing the
speakers and all that activity
at the same time trying to read
the amendment and then
amendments to the amendment very
frankly on able to do it
having to trust the committee on
our list but I'm concerned that
we have.
That would have been put
together this weekend I I
understand legislation gets done
this way that's the way it
happens but my concern is really
only that that our staff was not
working this weekend because the
committee was not working this
weekend so the earliest the
committee had an opportunity to
look at it would have been this
morning.
Earnest to them and our staff.
Very appropriately set the
amendment to our list.
Many members but we don't know
how we would have sure that that
information was shared
adequately with the people who
are in this in this line of work
providing the services and who
both of whom many of them are
opposed legislation this may
change their opposition may
soften.
Or maybe percent other reasons
for their opposition.
It's important for this
committee to the extent we can
do so to try to be fair to to
hear these bills particularly
were were we have this much
support and this much opposition
to any bill so concerned about
the timing of this ammendment
and I I Sir Duke I think your
amendment is well well fought
through
and in person joy could support
but at the same time this this
almost.
Thanks for me to suggest that
there be a committee substitute
for the bill that takes into
account thanks amendment so that
we can read it intelligently and
logically and I and I always ask
this committee critically
Senator doing very due to the
committee realize if you send
this bill over to the house in
the form that it's in right now
with this bill and this
amendments really pass the house
and then try and find these
amendments within the bill in
the final days and hours of the
session that's hard that's a
hard thing to do.
my preference would be for the
committee to.
To allow us the time and have
this matter reschedule but but I
realize that may not be the will
of the majority and I will
always honor that Mr Ludwig the
were you asking to be recognized
this gentleman if I might just
briefly
I received the amendment
yesterday afternoon at the same
time I believe that Senator
Duhigg forwarded the amendment
to all of the committee members
immediately following that I
provided the the amendment to my
colleague in the minority Mister
Cates this morning I forwarded
the amendment to some of the
opposition for their
distribution following the
permission from Senator Duhigg
so that was a the process we
employed on this bill Mr
Chairman well thank you Mr light
going day just for help there is
Senator doing
the you know that's the
exceptional working night and I
know to be able to count on that
the only reason that I feel in
this particular case that it may
be appropriate to to us to put
together a sub and look at it
again.
It is of the fact that we've had
this bill in our committee for
quite some time.
In and I know there's been
concern about me getting it
scheduled and I understand that
concern wanted to have it
scheduled and although it's been
the committee for quite some
time that we would still be
getting about extensive
amendment the day before the
hearing suggests to me that that
that this is something that may
appear to be a bit rushed to be
at the amendment at this point
time that's the committee to
consider that on this ammendment
again not to oppose the
amendment in any way at all but
rather to suggest that rather
than an amendment we we try to
put together committee so that
we hear all issues and that
perhaps we address all issues in
in a in a committee substance so
that that's my thinking on the
amendment but we're on a motion
to adopt the amendment so here
any other committee members on
adoption and then we'll take a
vote without will all of this
said anyone else on the
committee on the proposed
amendment Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
You know I I just I I just
really think having a substitute
is much better I mean if we're
serious about this bill we will
have a substitute so we're not
putting the next committee or
the house
to go through this process I
mean I found two tiny little
errors I mean and I got stuck on
those stairs because I kept
trying to make it work and it
didn't for me so I I you know I
haven't really read the rest of
the amendment so
And if we if we do this I I hope
we will afford the Sanchez the
opportunity to hear it first on
Wednesday our next committee
meeting and perhaps we also talk
about other issues that people
may have now so that when if we
go this way R. Sanchez that are
doing the substitute of hand
and make other amendment so that
we're not doing a lot of that
amending with the substitute on
Wednesday
I know the effort to get this
passed but I think you're right
that it it really requires a
substitute I thought we had a
substitute I've been looking for
substitute for half an hour
just.
Those are just my thoughts thank
you the the chair will take the
opportunity to you know to thank
you Senator you been on the
house Judiciary many many years
now Senate judiciary so you're
right you you caught a couple of
of things that were important I
think that Center doing it
knowledge is that those are are
probably appropriate
modifications to even very hard
work over the weekend and center
this is our work over the
weekend to get the memo or at
but I'm I'm I'm getting a strong
sense that we're not quite there
yet and and you all heard me on
this committee several times I
don't want to make the other
committees take care of things
that we have the opportunity to
correct here so thank you
Senator Stewart center I'm so
that we're still on the proposed
amendment to the bill and then
taking a vote on that unless the
committee wishes to go in a
different direction Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Instead of issues related to
this item and I would just
simply not going to be having
four sessions on Wednesday and
Thursday as long as we get the
order on Wednesday it would make
a difference on the time frame
ultimately offered to be able to
be heard the following week when
we're on the floor
we do our.
I will say that that this came
from.
This morning.
I understand the bill.
This is this is this is not an
area that I practiced in and and
asking questions and and and
trying to get answers about
different things and finally
Senator during the and I
finding time around third
meeting
this last this last week which
is really what we're trying to
get been able to find you have
been given your hospitals have
been running out of fuel
whatever the liberal to provide
to in order to be able to sit
down together and and just
program with the bill section
section and and and asking
questions about things and and
and and that's what so generated
a lot of this.
Let's just say that I do Senator
Steinborn Jeff this bill back to
the station that was held in the
in the leadership meeting
that we had of the leadership
getting about about how some of
these bills.
On.
And and outcomes the legislature
we're we're there we're there on
drafted by people who are more
intending around and and and
often times debilitating illness
drafting training as the isn't
that this is neither one of us
on and one of the things over
the weekend and I think we
didn't bother Center doing about
this
for that is over the weekend
and.
It's adjusting to the needs of
the poor girl but that that was
just I would ask questions as.
This moment understand why we
have a separate small naps and
installment loan acts I know
when this past month I was
president of the United Nations
yield at this point.
That.
The installer Act has kind of
slipped into the arms entirely
in terms of in terms of some of
the enforcement issues and and
and and other matters in
response and and so I mean you
know there are there are some
very complicated structural
issues.
Our.
Just wanted to this legislation
and some of it having to do with
with one of those that were
written back in nineteen fifty
nine and nineteen statutes the
written documents with the
managing of our fifty five and
and and and and just really just
development of language since
that as well Representative.
I would I'm.
And I did discuss about the a
potential of a sap and I know
that the the the two Sanchez did
of conversation about that
respect the decision that was
made
I think primarily by the by the
lead sponsor of terms of of of
proceeding with an amendment as
part of the committee
subcommittee given that given
that certainly amendment is very
clear what we're trying to amend
of the original bill but this is
something that at the end of our
conversation today in this back
Representative final dressing on
it I just think it deserves upon
hearing today and for us to to
be able to work through the
issues are up there and
currently stand hi this is now
on today and so I would ask for
the.
What's that last one again some
representatives last week.
For the week but we as much as
possible that we delve into the
into in the issues substantive
matters related to the bill
today I'm not so that so that
even if it if it needs to be
jacketed and it doesn't matter
come to us for us to say yes
this is what we talked about
that that that we're not having
the conversation no conversation
this next anymore and and ended
up with our the role of the
additional public comment that
the COVID should be restricted
to the difference between our on
the original bill and the and
the
All really some.
R. because I think that's what
would be most relevant to the
less that what.
Was it would come but the eggs
okay.
Those are good points federally
so again they echo what I think
Senator Stewart it was
suggesting earlier which is a
full full hearing today on all
issues of the Sanchez can gather
all of that information
otherwise we find ourselves in
an endless cycle where we come
back with a committees up next
time and that we hear be issues
all over again and it'll never
and.
Senator saying I think part of
this product.
Okay and then she a she was I
think previous no the program
long enough she's very pleased
to be on the on this committee
and and get to catch the lawyers
from time to time it's it's the
it's the school teacher that
comes out and I've got lots of
school teachers who love to
still correct me many years
later so good for her.
Now.
I go there let's see what I mean
that's.
I have been none since first
grade Senator Stewart here
nothing in comparison so
I think that the we're we're on
the amendment but I I think I've
expressed my my feelings to the
committee but where I'd like to
have us go but let's let's take
the amendment in terms and then
perhaps with the amendment if
adopted will look at a twenty
step with some changes to the
moment but but I I first of all
let me command center doing
consider Ivey Soto you know if
you all are coming up with these
amendments.
Can going through the bill while
we're on the Senate floor during
third reading you're far more
capable of multi tasking than I
am and I just want the committee
to understand that it is frankly
impossible for me to be presided
over this meeting and reading
the amendments and read the bill
and see how they work in in in
conjunction with one of our just
can't do it so and help you
understand why.
So so I'm I'm counting on the
committee to either be looking
for all those necessary changes
in a pandemic corrections to the
manta what for us taking the
time between now and the next
meeting at all all this echo
center Ivey Soto is point I
think we were to hear this first
up on Wednesday the and there's
no harm really to your progress
Senator souls and Senator doing
but but again I. I. I want also
repeat this point this bill this
bill is been schedule with us
think two or three times and I
appreciate your patience getting
here and at the same time the
fact that it's been schedule for
quite some time before this
committee also makes me believe
strongly that in fairness.
The the becoming amendments that
a lot of folks are just saying
the very first day of the
meeting itself it is it fairness
really demands some more time
for them to to the digest those
those proposed amendments but
those are my thoughts as the
chair we're on the proposed
amendment anyone else thoughts
where we're at this point Sir
Senator o'neill for FirstTime
and then Senator doing Center
o'neill is one of back up my our
pro tem and and a straw I
strongly agree a committee so
this needs to be a committee so
but also I agree that we should
here have a for hearing these
folks have been extremely
patient the sponsors of this
bill it's been on our schedule
for a long time so that's all
I'm saying so ever we proceed
right that's what I think is the
right way that's all I got thank
you senator.
Mr chair unless Senator schools
feel strongly otherwise I'm
happy to withdraw my.
Moving this amendment and and
bring it back at it.
I'm here maybe.
Senator Ivey Soto I have I am I
will stand down for now thank
you Mr I think my suggestion for
you Senator do it was to go
ahead and act on the amendment.
But but then that we would then
ultimately move for committee
set up adopting that amendment
and very frankly any others that
may come up as we because we
hear the matter fully now I
think that's the best way to go
to have us come back Wednesday
with something that looks like
it's final form so so I I I see
you nodding your head which
means you're prepared to take a
vote on the amendment itself.
With the amendments already made
by Senator Baca that correct yes
Mr chair all right good so we're
we're so we're on that matter
which is the proposed amendment
Senator Moores on the amendment
still Sir of the thank you Mr
chair thank you so Senator just
more question procedure that Mr
chair so what I'm hearing is is
that this boat on this
amendment that we both know
we're pretty much asking for
them and worked on a committee
so
That's how I'm just reading this
boat so we'll go no we come back
with me so we will yes for my
understanding the conversation
correctly Mr chair.
Senator Moores that's not my
understanding with the
conversation is going on what
amounts to the question Mr chair
Representative Armstrong figure
out what we're doing here I
think I may be misreading the
committee but but my reading of
the great right now is there
seems to be strong support for
preparing a committee substitute
and so the adoption of this
amendment would simply be
directing that the committee
subs to really take this
amendment and putting it into
the committee sub itself so free
frankly so that we can read
these amendments in the context
of the bill itself for me to
look at the amendment right now
look at a page and line number
and cross reference it back over
the bill is as I was saying
earlier is just not possible for
me to do ensure the building at
the same time so so what I would
like to so like cities amendment
in the form of the bill itself
which we would see by a
committee substitute so your
point center Moores I don't I
don't see a vote adopted the
amendment here to be Rick
rejected the idea of a committee
substitute I I so I I see I see
a nodding of Senator Duhigg
Senator Ivy Soto nodding their
heads so that that suggests to
me that they're prepared to have
the amendment adopted and then
also support a committee
substitute with that amendment
in place and any other
amendments to the committee
deems appropriate this afternoon
as we get the bill.
Thank you for joining as
intercompany amendments in
Minnesota today what practically
direction as to what would be in
the substance.
And that's what the before so
the Florida ripped out from
underneath me their prices right
so.
The just giving her time Senator
that's so this grantees both
kind of advisory boats go back
in and work on the so in the
Permian make sure and that will
on Wednesday will make sure all
of those issues are addressed so
correct Mr chair Senator Moores
that's my sense of the way the
committee would go would be.
Direction for a committee
substitute trustee Senator
duergar nodding her head on that
Celtic
thank you thank you senator I'm
so.
The committee members Senator
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman and all
that kind of jump on the
bandwagon that yes a committee
substitute is very apropos but I
would also remind that we also
do have amendments in context
that is a rule that we did adopt
and as bills are amended you
will have I'm on a line that
Legislative Council Service does
do is for that amendments that
are adopted are also as I call
in simple terms blended into the
bill so there is another option
thank you.
Senator Lopez that is very
helpful I'm glad we've done that
we for years I ask for that for
years council service from that
couldn't have that I never
understood why we now have it
although center Lopez in this
really for Senator Duhigg my
understanding is right now we
don't even have that tool
available to us on this bill in
other words you're amendments
because they've not yet been
adopted are not available or not
available in context with the
bill so I could look at a
document right now to understand
your amendments in the context
of the bill that is correct
yeah.
And and then it's a blended in
and then we have something to
look at with the amendments
added in that's correct right
thank you Sir Lopez anything
else Senator Lopez.
All right we're on the.
Proposed amendment as amended.
to Senate bill sixty six is
there any other discussion.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of these amendments.
I'm seeing none.
Emily would you please record
all members of the committee
present voting in support of the
adoption of the amendments as
amended.
Now on the bill as amended.
Pleasure the committee Senator
Ivey Soto.
Mr Webb remembers actually as we
were discussing all of this you
gotta remember tend to be from
the doctor because I was working
on the oil and one of the many.
And tribal tour of related.
conflicts with this bill.
On that note and so then the
bills after when they sent me
R. the the stuff that I've been
sent.
There is a section that was
Morris.
In these bills and so I'm sure
investment right now and
one of the house is.
Our.
What is this point in time
Senate bill sixty six
institutions be offering loans
to those lands that are of ten
thousand dollars or less the in
nineteen fifty five it was five
thousand dollars or less and our
and so section fifty eight dash
fifteen to twenty one which is
the smart Act of nineteen forty
five this private land activists
fifty eight dash seven.
Yes Representative is smiling
after maybe fifty five there's
actually one section where where
five thousand was recommended to
Senate president.
R. and so I'm happy to present
this customer on their own if
not be provided to the committee
and so it would have been
looking at a summation of the
should be in the billable
and that's fine too this does is
just it just simply
I guess said it just
appointments to five to ten in
this program act in terms of
what constitutes a lot of money
we don't want to have a
completion problem how the line.
Thank you for that explanation.
Let's see we can do this a
couple of ways we could of we
could ask for an amendment now
but I think that's gonna
formality we don't need to have
I think.
I think with the explanation
center Representative you work
on Senator doing that they would
simply make sure that that's
incorporated into the committee
set up but you're but you're
learning the committee to.
This change so we can discuss it
now if there's any questions
were opposition is.
Gets it.
On the suggestion of Ivy Soto
that would change the threshold
I guess one way to say from five
thousand dollars to ten thousand
dollars in assure that there's
affected we continuity between
this proposed bill and other law
Getty discussion on on making
this change in the form of the
committee so.
I'm not seeing of the house are
in who is.
Senator night Sir do a concern
please not Mr out.
I'll just say that yeah I think
this is a good catch I have no
problem including this and and
Committee sob.
Going to trust to use Center
souls to be making a note of
these changes and I assure you
when we come back to the
committee so the members will be
looking to see that that all
these were brought into the into
the final version coming out of
this committee in any other
questions suggestions or
comments to the committee what
might go into a committee so.
We're on any other questions
four the dispute with the bill
in general now is a good time
for us to fully care and debate
the bill Michael and doing so
would be that when we come back
on Wednesday that we not kind of
of really proponents or
opponents of bills rarely and
evaluation of the committee so.
It's great to committee
questions so now is a good
chance for members to.
Debate.
Policy issues that are before us
on this bill or ask any other
questions you make other
suggestions so Senator Ivey
Soto.
Mr chairman and and and so we're
going to direct myself to that.
Of the sponsors of the of the
bills are souls.
As well as that are doing it is
I mean I I would say this is
once more for me it's a it's a
when I would have struggled with
this bill and I and I lean
towards as billable rate
struggled with this bill is that
is that is that if this is a
very understanding is that this
could not happen without a
hearing an opportunity heard and
hearing.
Senator Israel Senator Sedillo
Lopez your microphone is open.
There's still over your
microphone was college I I
apologize I'm ready I'm
listening to you I apologize
just want you to because what
you're saying Senator Ivey Soto.
The farm is on the on the on
the.
Percent press is in AP this is
I'm cert percent APR
it's a so that's what.
Are you know are to run to
support the morality of our over
thirty six percent.
Representative but as we as
we've seen just in our
discussion.
On the on the proposed on the on
the
what what what would be the
The committee so.
When
eight and and you know I
appreciate it very much on the
opening that centers schools
had where he talked about the
fact that that thirty six
percent once alarmed Mexico
until a certain point.
Number that.
We're not.
But part Representative as I'm
as I'm trying to understand the
impact of this will have.
Yes Representative transmission
that I've had is is is is
programs.
One probably perhaps and what
this bill does not to.
This bill sorry so I
understanding Senator something
happens.
When you were stronger these are
are are well you know.
In the practices.
What's what's discussed
oftentimes the stories.
Act act that Lawrence get.
Service online and then that
gets more than during remote in.
Right level.
And and then fees and interest
rates get capitalized into that
will blow.
The
was a promising practices and
not.
You talk a little bit Senator
and I miss the actual question
part of that I just hope that
last sentence.
So is.
Our own stories about predatory
loan practices.
What are often times is that
someone takes out around.
And and that there are some
really good make a payment and
then and then the land is shooed
and very.
And and our interest.
Also gets capitalized into the
regression roles that are still
part of this bill not not not.
Mr chair yeah and I'd have to
turn to my experts Karen buyers
who is more the expert in this
particular area as to whether
that's possible or what happens
with those types of loans a
parent if I might please.
Yes Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto
on the underlying issue though
in that context is that the
people are being put into loans
with excessively high fees and
interest rates.
It is true that there is the
possibility that somebody at the
thirty six percent interest rate
what also or APR I should call
it would also be refinanced
people are being refinanced
though at one seventy five
because they cannot afford to
make the payment councils are
just one of those ones has
composite there would
dissertation on insurance going
to practice.
Alright this is under this this
bill is that not correct that is
correct.
And and and in fact there is no
limits the number of times.
Can be and we are refinanced and
and our our and and expanding
interest rate more pronounced
every single time it gets we
financed under this under this
bill is that correct.
Well I don't know what you mean
when you say capitalized the
small loan act is a simple
interest loan at the bank
installment loan is a we
computed ball act both of which
allow prepayments
and being the Hey are will serve
my.
Yeah Karen if you would please
please remember to go through
the chair thank you my
apologies.
It's good to get a good run for
both of us I'm so Mister
chairman and and I'm as Myers.
And so it was what was or what
I'm dealing with him into the
cap has another agenda but but
basically if I if I am wrong and
and and it's it's come June and
I.
The principal and interest and
then we should around.
Rest becomes part of the
principle of the leadership
role.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto not
in a simple interest loan.
Are you would be amount that the
new loan with Kate use to pay
off the prior loan.
R. which would include interest
and then there would be a new
loan that would be basically as
if you were starting all over
with usually the way the
practice works an increase and
the loan amount and that could
change in the payment amount and
the change in the firm.
Words words and I'm sorry
Eight six percent
thousand dollar loan and at the
time that they were comes due.
I started about a hundred
dollars and I still remember
trust on the interest of the
three hundred and sixty dollars.
I'm sorry and then if they're
taking.
And to me Robert no more buyers
of three hundred sixteen dollars
is that not correct.
Mr.
Mr chair Senator and Soto I
don't as I understand what
you're saying it is incorrect
because the loan would have a
defined maturity date of which
is a minimum of a minimum of a
hundred and twenty days but it
requires for substantially equal
payments so if someone has made
for example the first three
payments on the loan the NMAA
refinance the loan before after
the third payment they maybe
finance that won the fourth
payment is due they may
refinance it when the second
payment is due so this is not a
single payment loan.
R. eight so it is a question of
when the team individual
payments are due which is
slightly different scenario than
I than I understand you to be
describing if I was and what we
know.
Mr chairman and payment matters
there's a there's a there's a
principal about describing.
What I'm describing is that is
that.
When we operated twenty million
I diss.
What
a thousand and a hundred
thousand dollars.
They want to refinance that loan
several times and every time it
refinances it requirements as
far higher amounts because there
are I'm here to announce price
I'm paying interest.
This bill.
What
is possible.
This month's.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto the
predatory practice includes the
excessively high APR that's
charged on the loan it includes
the fact that people are willing
to loans where they do not have
the income to repay the loan on
its terms.
Where it is it should be evident
to a responsible lender that
someone who comes in with seven
hundred or a thousand dollars a
month.
Not afford to pay a loan with
payments of three hundred
dollars a month for example
which are caused as a result of
the high interest rates
so when you talk about predatory
practices you have isolate
multiple different pieces and
seek to regulate each the.
What happened of nationally is
that and and this is
substantiated by the department
of defense of research on
military lending act if I can in
my mind that the chair and
senator driving some of the
military lending act is a thirty
six percent all inclusive
cap military lending act went
into effect in two thousand six
and they found that in response
to the initial limited focus of
the act that there was a
vacations all over the place
and so they had to expand the
act of and so there are multiple
ways to evade but the court that
the department of defense and
other state of our submitted is
that you have to have reasonable
affordable interest rate that is
the price range that.
Roger community searches on
things I'm not asking so I'm
sorry service please answer the
question I'm asking someone to
the question on our state
verification of we are
discussion of the issues of us.
I'm not it was attention about
the general fund surprise teddy
Roosevelt as but as mentioned
about Mr chairman.
So.
Should.
Senator change your response on
this bill.
The question or I can.
Would you please ask the
question again because I'm a
relatively bright guy and I
quite frankly can't follow
exactly what the question was
asked of me please ask it again.
So.
Practices.
I think practice.
Breaking up and I find it very
difficult to understand your
your of volume is breaking up I
don't know if other people are
having that trouble also.
Senator Senator Ivey Soto we are
having some difficulty with your
audio and and I would say it's
significant enough that
sometimes are having difficulty
hearing your thoughts your
questions I don't know if
there's any community corrected
from where you're at right now I
see you're in the capitol our
presumably they've got a good
one wireless signal but
maybe just take all slower Sir
will will transfer out why we're
getting bad audio from you but
we are getting bad on you
Senator Ivey Soto.
Let me see I'm trying to log on.
In regards to somebody else and
then you activate its that
somebody else puts.
Well okay.
Right.
Senate we should try that it's
getting logged back in.
Well it does that other
committee members I didn't have
anybody else on my list.
Mr chair I believe Senator
Pirtle has his hand raised and
and as soon.
You have a you have to you have
some capacity I don't have
Senator I didn't see said I saw
centered for proposal camera
Office what I saw.
you must have a different link
than I do but Center Perrin were
you open to get recognized.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
I'm curious
I think it was in two thousand
nineteen.
When we change the one hundred
seventy five percent cap.
have we seen any significant
change or what have been the
results since that rate cap is
it still an issue
you know I I I think I find it
interesting thing that it's been
only two years
since we last.
We went through this and we're
already back.
it's my understanding that the
research data that was going to
come back from that in we have
yet to even see the effects of
the change can can we address
you know here it is only two
years later we're already
wanting to go from.
a cap that was put on to even
the lower rate without any that
I've seen any real data showing
that there's there's an issue
as major as has been reported
today.
And so.
Mr chair of I believe that was
passed in two thousand and
seventeen not two thousand and
nineteen
the data that was requested
there is prior to that when we
had no interest rate cap there
was very little data being
shared and the two thousand
seventeen what did require that
they start sharing some of that
data however under the prior
administration they still didn't
used to collect much of that
data and so would two thousand
nineteen and I think as Senator
Stewart out sometimes but I
there might have been and I
don't remember the number I but
there was one that said we
really really need it that you
have to get data of that data is
just now coming out that that
was just on the number of loans
in the other types of things not
on how many people with this
hurting or predatory lending
really to get data as to how
many loans were being made but I
might also defer to my experts
that.
If you would please you need
much of this in much more
detail.
Thank you Mr chair Senator souls
Senator
There is data from twenty
eighteen to twenty nineteen and
senator schools is right that
the change went into effect in
January of twenty eighteen
we know that just from the
twenty nineteen data report that
twelve percent of the loans were
written off by companies as bad
debt.
we know that there was
approximately two hundred
million dollars in interest and
fees paid in that time period we
also know that eighty five
percent of the lenders continue
to be subsidies from out of
state and that of about twenty
three hundred four as were Peter
we possess as of result of
the faults are in part title
loans and the data from twenty
eighteen is comparable so that
that it is available we've also
had consumer attorneys who've
been consulted by
Are consumers who have either
been sued by lenders since the
twenty seventeen following into
a fact that the hundred and
seventy five percent right all
and who have along with me
reviewed their loan files and
determined as I testified that
there continues to be people
being put into loans that they
clearly cannot afford that they
are being pushed into financing
and that ultimately their loan
size debt load and they extend
the term of the loan is
increased substantially by
thousands of dollars sometimes
tens of thousands of dollars and
and the and up to fourteen
because they cannot pay and
could not pay from the
beginning.
Mr chair and senator we hear a
lot about you know that it's
hurting people that you know we
haven't heard from any of those
people I also have heard from
people that made these loans
help or we just assuming that
these loans do not help people
that are just a really bad spot
that need for five hundred Bucks
just to get to move to the next
paycheck so that they can ensure
that they don't lose their home
and we we hear a lot about those
that the supposed to get hurt
but are we ignoring the people
who use these loans who are able
to just get to that next
paycheck in this is the the one
thing that ensures that they
don't lose everything have we
have we discounted those people
Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair and senator
if you have not been getting
thousands or hundreds of emails
about this bill will ban are
biased you are like me have
somebody who is filtering your
email so that you can still do
business on that online.
There are hundreds of stories
they've been sent to lots of
people
they maybe being organized by
another group they're not being
organized by the but I certainly
have been getting them I also
get a number of emails and phone
calls of people are angry that
that need because I'm carrying
something that has such a high
overdose rate of thirty six
percent think that is I'm.
I thank god we did to charge
somebody that high of a rate I
want to point out again this is
not about access to credit it's
about the exposure to get almost
everyone who takes out these
loans if you go and take out a
loan to buy a car you've got a
car you go and use your credit
to buy a house these people are
being put into a debt trap as
they are trying to hang on
instead of asking for the help
that they need are there are a
couple that are this provides a
lifeline for them and they get
out of that probably the vast
majority of them it is the exact
opposite.
Mr chair Senator that the but
the question of the data that
we're waiting on to really
analyzed.
Who is being harmed how many are
being helped
have we seen an improvement
since the requirement of having
the posting of the range I I I
think that was that the bill Mr
chair Senator that we did in two
thousand nineteen and required
the posting was also the overall
that that occurred in two
thousand seventeen.
Mr chair Senator you know I'm
not sure exactly what the two
thousand nineteen bill did again
with the two thousand seventeen
which I understand the place
took affected two thousand
eighteen but we have nearly a
third of all of those small
loans are ten or more days past
due which means those are people
that are in trouble I mean they
are going under water and.
The I'm trying to look at the
bank the bad get borrowers
enable rate is almost twelve
percent of all the ones in New
Mexico were of this nature which
means these are people that are
being put in trouble by the long
these loans not being helped and
assisted.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle if I I
may add on to that I think one
thing that's important to keep
in mind about that two thousand
nineteen bill and the data that
will result from that that
that's not loan level
information that is generalized
information that it that is as
all brought together but it it
doesn't give loan level
information that would allow us
to status to point out here are
the actual individuals being
impacted by Senator and miss
Myers might be able to speak to
that more but I think there's
there's some some
misunderstandings about what
that the data that will come out
of that two thousand nineteen
bill actually provides.
Mr chair the real question
here's these did we not passed
legislation that required
signage ensuring that the
consumer was informed.
I want to say it happened
recently at least out of the
Senate I we don't keep up with
every single piece of
legislation until we pass out of
the Senate
requirements to to have adequate
signage for an informed consumer
I want to image make sure that
the that is correct that at
these of loan institutions that
we have that in place currently.
Mr chair Senator about what part
of the two thousand seventeen
bill was that there had to be
language in English and in
Spanish that whether that means
these consumer was fully
informed or whether they were
desperate and ready to sign
anything it doesn't speak to any
of that.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
I.
I still have the issue that here
we have some legislation that
Required the.
Consumer to be informed and now
the state is saying we're we're
gonna step and because we're
smarter than a inform consumer
to come in and and even go
further what one is going to
happen Mr chair and senator
for some of these people that
are so desperate that they read
the signage and they still sign
up for one of these loans if if
they're not able to get a loan
from a license or a legal
lending facility what what kind
of black market.
Lente or or what will we see
these people be forced to do
will we actually be putting them
in situations
where their lives may be
threatened or or something along
those lines that's what I'm I'm
very concerned about that if we
put in some of these policies
that that'll be the unintended
consequence that if if these
places do go out of business
that people will see.
Loans from I guess one of the
TIRS we've all heard as loan
sharks.
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator out this is not
new in New Mexico numerous other
states have done this they have
made those changes and quite
frankly what you're describing
is about it happens very very
rarely and those already are
illegal they would continue to
be.
Mr chair and senator or their
loans like these available
online from other states or
other places.
Mr chair Senator online loans
are also under the New Mexico
act they are made to New Mexico
citizen they would be underneath
this just as there are at the
federal level any military it
doesn't matter what state law
allows the federal active duty
that the military is at thirty
six percent so online loans are
under the same requirements that
someone by made in person would
be.
So Mr chair and and senator I'm
trying to understand what
constitutes a long term loan
but we're we're speaking of a
short term loans here what what
does it take to be a long term
loan.
Mr chair Senator I'd have to
refer to occurring on the the
details of what constitutes a
long term short term what the
minimums are and things of that
sort so Karen Myers if you could
please thank you Mr chair
Senator Pirtle these loans that
are covered under New Mexico law
or a minimum of a hundred twenty
days in twenty seventeen as you
noted we eliminated all single
payment short term loans in New
Mexico there is no cap on the
length of any of the loans that
currently are made under the.
Rubric of installment loan.
And and may I also say that it's
of been a very long term law to
disclose the range of in the
loan documents and so that that
is not new in twenty seventeen
and I believe the posting
requirement which was enacted by
New Mexico was an act of before
the twenty seventeen law.
Mr chair and and senator say
that other states have done this
but are they exactly the same do
they offer other options you
know I've heard this in the past
from from presenters at you know
so many states do this will when
you Mr chair and senator really
dig in they do something like
this or they do something
similar but then there's some
significant differences is this
identical to the states that
that were reference for the
other states offer other options
like payday loans or or
something along that to to allow
for for other options for
consumers.
Mr chair Senator there a couple
of states that have almost
identical to what New Mexico has
there's other states that have
lower rates than what New Mexico
is proposing we are by no means
the the out liar on the bottom
at there are some that exact
different pieces at other pieces
and things of that sort of for
both consumers and for the the
company's having something that
is very clear about thirty six
percent APR seems to be the
cleanest and we regular people
wanted to have certainty in
regulation this provides that
certainty it makes it very clear
that this is what's allowed and
this is what model out.
Mr chair Senator you said that a
few states have identical
you know I think we're.
Some of it for for me is coming
in is this
confusion between APR are in
interest rates is the goal to to
set the interest rate or is the
goal Mr chair Senator to set the
APR.
Mr chair Senator other bill very
clearly defined all of it as APR
that removes the confusion about
origination fees about interest
rates or other things it with it
all on the exact same scale of
APR.
Mr chair and senator so we're
we're essentially setting the
fees that that these places can
charge and so whenever you you
go to get a loan for for a home
the number of hours that it
requires a bank to perform that
work for say a a modest home of
sixty to seventy thousand
dollars
you know it's one I the APR
Mister chair Senators low
because the amount of of hours
that went into it for the amount
that they're going to get a
return it just for that.
So if if a business is having to
spend multiple hours to set up a
loan let's say on a small amount
that we're discussing about.
By limiting fees Mr Mr chair
Senator we're really
Putting putting the of the real.
Wait on these businesses that.
The unintended consequence
Mister chairman Senator when it
comes to APR
of the unintended consequence
maybe that they cease to exist
and I I I I I know for a fact
that a lot of people Mr chair
Senator have been able to use
these places to
get to that paycheck that that
then they can just really start
to rebuild on that without this
this is the only place that they
could even get any kind of help
that this will be offered.
So Mr chair and senator is there
any way that we could just come
up with an acceptable interest
rate and then allow for these
institutions to determine their
own fees so that the state isn't
determining the fees and things
for them.
Mr chair Senator this is the
thirty six percent all in yes so
that somebody doesn't offer a
low interest rate exorbitant
fees because that then becomes
what the cost is and that
becomes the APR that is required
to be paid back and so no there
is not a way of allowing people
just that whatever you want and
they give a really low interest
rate because the effect is hi
APR that's exactly what this
bill is trying to prevent and
trying to avoid any and as I
indicated earlier if companies
cannot afford to make the fall
short term loans that they
should not be making the small
short term loans at those right
there are companies that are
able to do this but if companies
feel like they can't make any
money at it that they are trying
to make money on the backs of of
people that don't have the
ability to.
Mr chair Senator I think as a as
a body we we have to be careful
when it comes to private
business how much we allow a
private business to charge for
for their service
Some people Mr chair Senator
would go to a mutation and get a
one hundred dollar hair cut and
many of us might say well they
really got ripped off.
and in my want to go find
someone that could do a better
job for for less money so I I
think that's where I'm really
struggling here's with the APR
versus the interest rate portion
of it
these businesses are are private
establishments that have fixed
costs in getting this money to
their consumer and and by doing
a PR over interest we're really
setting the the the fee
structure for them and we might
be hamstringing them to the
point where they cannot do
business and if if we don't have
these places in New Mexico I
haven't seen enough evidence
from the opposition or the
proponents of this legislation
to really feel that that the
issue is as large as is as it's
being reported I think there's a
little bit of a of a chicken
little effect going on here in
in my concern is that when these
institutions go on that the
negative effects will be larger
than what is being brought
forward to us today so I would
suggest if we want to limit
interest rates let's work on
that would sit down with
industry and and come up with
something that that is a win win
so that these places can stay in
business but also not be
predatory because I'm I'm very
much feel that we need to ensure
that that that they're not being
predatory in their interest
rates but when it comes to fees
in fixed costs and getting this
money to the consumer I think we
need to let the free market take
care of that there's enough
different lenders that they'll
they'll be efficient in doing
that Mr chair Senator so if we
can could do that moving forward
I I do have a question Mr chair
Senator has has industry ban
in on any of the conversations
and building this legislation
have we gone to them to to see
what A. B. APR would be
acceptable or what interest rate
would be acceptable with the
risks that they take.
On these on these loans.
Madam chair and senator I think
madam chair now I don't think
there's a madam chair Mr chair
well I I only see all there's a
nail sorry Mr chair.
Mr chair and senator out this
bill has been out there for a
while from the very start my
email is available to everyone
my phone number is available to
everyone I do return calls at
the last meeting it was brought
up nobody came to us to talk to
us about what we want well quite
frankly this bill was about what
consumers wanted need not what
industry wants and needs and
after and I made very clear at
the last meeting that are open
to talk to anyone and there are
twenty or thirty different
companies of that again the
testimony at the last meeting
and you heard the list of the
numerous different companies
that are in opposition to this
and since when it went through
tax business and transportation
I have been contacted by two.
Of them both of them started the
conversation with I only
represent like for real I don't
represent everyone and comments
to the effect of you know we're
the good guys they're not going
and so there is not an industry
position on this because the
types of
of
what they have there are all
over the place and in
competition with.
Okay so you are on a live Mike
Sir.
Your legs open Senator deal.
and so I have been available and
two people have contacted me and
I asked that very specifically
put in writing what what your
group or industry why and we got
one thing in writing that was
sort of like well we kind of
like to have something along
these lines it was not a
specific changes to the bill the
only thing that they were
uniformed about was can we don't
wait that and my response was
not.
Mr chair and senator I
understand the concerns with
consumer but you know consumers
want flying cars in the industry
can't find that for for for what
the consumer wants but I think
it's important that we don't
exclude them
you know we need to have input
from industry to say what what
can they do.
and if they haven't contacted
you Mister chairman Senator you
know that's that's on them I
have that in the past happened
to me and it's it's not the it's
not fair to to claim that but I
hope that we have a few days
until we're gonna hear the
committee sub and there's gonna
be some work done a committee
set up it would be nice if if
they were able to reach out and
at least expressed similar
concerns give their input on on
what they can do what rates
Are acceptable what A. P. R.
would really work to ensure that
that these laws are still
available for consumers while
also maintaining your intent of
putting a stop to predatory
lending so I think it ended in a
good faith effort everybody
should be able to get together
in the next couple days put
together something at least have
some conversation because you
know industry really should be
involved in this because as
although some time to come in
and they the cry will a lot of
times are correct that if if we
do something like this than than
the industry will will cease to
exist now that's the ultimate
goal of this legislation is to
get rid of these types of
lending institutions will then
you know by all means don't meet
with them but I think we should
be a front that that's the
that's the goal but if it's not
if the goal is to in the
predatory practices the on
ethical practices that just
being mention let's sit down and
find out where they can meet
where interest levels can be
that that works for for everyone
involved because the reality is
that people taking out these
loans are high risk so when
these institutions take into
account that fifteen to twenty
percent of people will not be
able to pay them back.
Then they have to calculate that
it what they charge.
So we we really need to listen
to industry on this Mr chair and
senator and I hope in the next
couple days we're able to make
that happen thank you.
Senator Pirtle the committee
members.
And Mr chair just because you
can see the zoom hands are
Senator Stewart has hers Amanda
okay and I should be able to see
students but Senator Stewart.
So Mister chairman I have a a
very I have a very stupid
question.
that I'm brave enough to ask and
I don't know who to that can
answer me so.
You know I've done these bills
myself in the house I'm not
successful someone I think from
the opposition I made the
comment that we no longer have
payday loans for title loans and
if that's true I want to know
who is in the multiple
businesses all up and down
central in my district near the
base that are all title loans
and payday loans so who's in
those buildings now if we don't
have payday loans and title
loans anymore.
And I Mr chair Senator I so yes
and I believe it was two
thousand seventeen New Mexico
about rural outlawed payday
loans
we definitely still have title
loans but but one of the reasons
for this all inclusive thirty
six percent cap is that in this
industry it is welcome all you
try to regulate one part of it
and they pop up getting around
that regulation to do the exact
same practice under a different
name and so what what we found
and I and other states that
tried to to regulate individual
practices stuff like like stuff
like the the things Senator Ivy
Soto was referring to with you
know rolling cap recapitalize in
these loans and things like that
if you tried to just regulate
those things it doesn't work
they keep popping up and get
around them in other ways the
one approach that we found has
worked consistently is doing
this all inclusive APR right and
so that's that's why we're doing
that in this bill because
otherwise yes no it it's it's
it's a headline on the solution.
So are you telling me Mister
chairman Senator do hit that
those payday loans are alive and
well in those businesses up and
down a central they just don't
call themselves payday loans.
Mr chair Senator yes that is
exactly the situation after the
bathroom.
Well.
About the other schools you you
are you are.
In my Senator souls.
So they
went to the bathroom.
They even have the Mister
chairman Senator do that they
even have the same names on them
they still have payday lenders
on.
I see Karen Meyer shaking her
head yes.
Yes Mr chair Senator yes
absolutely I mean it's so far we
have not effective found a way
to effectively regulate
predatory lending in New Mexico
and said that that is why this
bill is is now is before you now
because the data shows us that
this is the most effective way
to do that okay thank you thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you anyone else the
committee.
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr chairman by the way
little point Simpson and up in
the corners when we raise our
answers are also up there right
now but that's usually will sort
I wanted to follow on what we're
just so Senator Stewart was
saying in a couple other issues
Senator do we just said we have
no effectively been able to
eliminate the goal of this and I
don't believe this bill will
ever do that either because of
the nature of substitutes in the
market place which brings me to
the question I have a came up
earlier and just was briefly
gone over that the I remember
during the Superbowl there was a
app that was basically a payday
loans or maybe not rate or is it
it said if you needed fifty
dollars will give you fifty
dollars so your next payday
I just do a Google search fall
this year was going on there
seems to be about twenty
different apps for that your
reason and then the testimony
earlier so there was tried to
speak to the mid west somewhere
and I was kind of blown off by
one of the expert witnesses and
I wanted to circle back to that
are the tribes doing this are
providing these type of payday
loans.
Mr chair Senator Moores now my
understanding from something
that miss Myers as mentioned
earlier and and I'll defer to
her is that the tribe's fall
under federal regulation of
those loans and so would be the
CFPB regulations but miss Myers
you know more about that than I.
Mr chair Senator Moores of date
the tribal entities and tribal
affiliated entities up do offer
these loans they are subject to
CFPB regulation of they are also
subject to the FTC regulation
and have been the targets of a
number of enforcement actions by
both federal and duties
they are not subject to an
enforcement action by state
and that is the big distinction
online lenders who are not
tribally affiliated if I my Mr
chair before we get to the
online stuff so are the tribe's
accounts.
interest rates and origination
fees all think we're talking
about here are those tribal
entities are doing this are they
trapped by the federal
government from the start loans
there is no current cap except
for the military lending act
applies to service members and
families
so Mr chair Senator board sorry
bro but it's really hard during
during zoom in on the probably
worst agree just reciprocated to
go to the church chair so Mister
chair our current.
So that was the thing was
glossed over earlier I want to
make sure I understood that
correctly the tribal entities
are doing this are not regulated
in this manner would provide
incentives for try to their New
Mexico or elsewhere get insisted
quite frankly the.
Good business opportunity for
them to get into the school
nothing will prevent them from
doing that's what I just heard
you say.
Mr chair Senator Moores can I
correct that please.
There are there have been
enforcement actions if a six
date as an interest rate that.
And a lender including a tribal
lender lands into that state.
Then more of the federal
agencies are brought actions
regarding those practices
and it really depends Senator on
a lot of complicated you know
business arrangements and
whether or not that I did the to
wonder or whether it's really a
front of for other people who
are non tribal members so those
are actions that have taken
place successfully against
violations of state law so Mr
chair so our current so if one
of the tribes around Albuquerque
wanted to move those
institutions that senator from
senator Stewart's District
movements in my district saved
Sandia pueblo
good right there off the
interstate.
With this law prevents them from
doing.
Mr.
Senator Moores
If it was enforced by a federal
agency yes.
R. but the state does not have
the authority to enforce that
even though there is case law
that says they are bound by the
state limit.
That's been a litigated issue
obviously.
And to the point I've never had
to use about these apps that are
popping up including the
Superbowl latter mentioned and
all these other apps I just look
up it seems like it would be
very easy to be able to go ahead
and get one of the stated loans
out to provide delivered
directly to my bank accounts for
these things regulated.
Mr chair Senator Moores they are
regulated by the federal
government yes by the CFPB and
by the FTC so again Mr chair
care and they're not cap the
right start trapped origination
fees are caps on these.
Mr chair Senator Moores if they
are it is here's where I'm
getting confused are you talking
back tribal lenders are online
lenders generally I'm sorry Mr
chairman I I I I I got the
answer wanted or thought there
was there for the tribal
entities it was the parents in
its marquee with C. answer that
I got so I did move on to my
second point on those so
substitutes so to these are
these kind of loans was there
what I would what I just did my
quick research myself was these
apps because I remember that
Superbowl ad and I know super
eight are cheap.
And so that got me my peak my
interest or just a quick Google
search Mr chair current in the
popped up all over the place.
Mr chair Senator course online
lenders are regulated by state
law.
And they are subject to
licensure and they are subject
to enforcement actions by the
state and also by the federal
agencies.
But again the federal agency
doesn't capital speaks Mr.
Mr chair Senator more the
federal agency can take action
if they fail to by if they
violate state caps and the state
government and the state can
also take action if they violate
state tax based on state law
that is very clear and settle
law so so Mr chair Sir are
occurring that sounds like it's
a little more clear that the
tribal issue
but then at least a third
question what about overseas
obviously we know about online
gambling you know things like
that our other these apps and
websites so the better overseas
and are not covered by any of
the regulatory process you just
talk about.
Mr chair Senator Moores they are
covered by the regulatory
process at the federal level and
the CFPB and I believe the other
there some other federal
agencies that have shut down
offshore lending in the past and
monitor that very closely.
Mr chair but why don't they shut
down the also
damn what if that's the case
that you see.
Mr chair Senator Moores I really
don't know the answer to that
question.
Mr chair and I wanted to circle
back and thanks for those
answers three in my point would
be that there's a lot of
substitutes Miss World besides
the loan shark that's under
probe talked about all of these
things are are you know it's
almost the same argument Mr
chair of legalizing marijuana in
we want to get it out of the
black market at least we know
what the consequences are bad
for society we just want to get
out of whack walk market so we
can actually regulated that's
kind of interesting those are
the same same market was
commission we're going to
different direction with this
market would want want to
eliminate and so there is been
Sabina black market overseas
market with marijuana we want to
get rid that black market
overseas market by regular so
just missing contracts there and
one of the fall back in two
thousand nineteen and are really
confused about some of the
testimony about the two thousand
seventeen the first of two
thousand fourteen and my cell
phone service following up Mr
chair of church so what they're
saying was in two thousand
nineteen we request our
instructor and start collecting
data I think one of the numbers
was like fifteen different
matrix in metals markets that
would affect about eighteen
months ago now it's kind of lost
over can you really explain to
me what we require two thousand
nineteen I agree with senator
portals point that that seems
awful within the last eighteen
months to be that changed
changes so that's was glossed
over earlier I just like to it's
clarity are.
What happened you got some
genetic Representative two
thousand nineteen we ask for
specific things that have not
been delivered is my
understanding yes Representative
Mr chair turned.
Mr chair Senator Moores there
was in twenty I I in twenty
seventeen much of the data that
was already being collected as a
routine basis for FID stripped
from the twenty seventeen bill
prior to twenty seventeen any
lender who made loans at less
than one seventy five was exempt
from reporting to FID at all.
And one twenty seventeen was
passed that there was some data
reporting required but most of
the prior reporting requirements
that have been put in place in
twenty eleven what was not in
the bill my understanding is
that that was unintentional so
in twenty nineteen discussions
ensued about putting back in the
data that was deleted data
requirements that were deleted
and there was also some
additions added to the data that
would be collected and some
clarification where all the data
was not.
Helpful and that was being
reported and so that was the
data bill at that time and so it
was intended to
it is for sure accountability
and transparency for all lenders
doing landing in the state it
would still apply and still be
needed in the event that there
was there would be a lower rate
cap are there is a report from
the I do from twenty eighteen
and twenty nineteen and the only
thing that is and and these
reports come after the session
is over so there's typically
that kind of lack so we have
twenty eighteen we have twenty
nineteen of the twenty the
twenty twenty data would be
forth coming sometime in the
summer of this year.
Okay so we will have more data
next year okay thank you Mr
chair thank you Karen I really
appreciate those certifications
again I think that this is top
of and.
But the substitutes are out
there and I I before market
places that probably some
regulatory process in our out of
the darkness especially here and
compass group the sponsor loan
shark is been around for a long
long time rounded H. world it's
been around for a long long time
to to be around and I would much
rather people who are in dire
straits have the ability to go
someplace that is regulated and
lose track are more transparent.
I would be really victimized on.
On the street so that's kind
just more more more general
political philosophy our
reserves are virtual on all
these issues are try to be
consistent Senator Salafist
knows what the other chair just
mentioned
come as a conservative
Republican should shock all.
but I do believe that they
should be regulated we switched
we've been The Oprah.
Stop micromanaging and the
unintended consequences of these
rate caps the traps are we also
have a lot of consequences are
Senate problems six
but I think we are causing more
problems solved when we try to
micro manage businesses.
No.
Medical business and everything
else that we all do it so we
just make things worse instead
school so thank you I really
appreciate those answers about
where I a lot of my questions
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Senator so you got your audio
fixed we're back to you and then
we'll go you Senator Baca
etcetera etcetera I'll ask
committee members recognize
we've been on this bill for
better than two hours maybe two
and a half hours and there are
other sponsors waiting to be
heard but we do want to have a
full hearing of this so we come
back we will be another hearings
Sir I guess.
Okay so let me give this another
try and if not I will I will
For today.
So.
I'm sorry since that are labeled
as predatory practices.
Our.
What is that that people to come
around they can't afford they
then refinance that loan at one
of the instrument points.
And and I think as a practical
matter on the long they take our
rural to pay off the first loan.
So then they have new
installments of you will have to
pay.
And in the number of loans.
Hi this.
I'm gonna take out a greater
amount of money the what the
overgrown list regionally we are
preparing more often on the
paint interests.
So.
As well I do not see where now
Yes.
Well so are in this bill is that
works.
Mr chair and Senator Ivey Soto
let me make sure I'm
understanding what you're saying
and and try to put it with a
practical example have you talk
about the latest out of thousand
dollar loan with thirty six
percent interest they're going
to be making approximately two
hundred fifty dollar payments
every four months for instance
plus there's going to be three
hundred sixty dollars or fourth
of that there's going to be an
additional ninety dollars so
there are they've got a payment
of three hundred and forty
dollars so your indicating that
suppose they all on that first
payment of three hundred forty
dollars and then go back to the
company and now our financing.
What are what are they financing
now at this point because they
they still only no they of.
Thousand three hundred forty
dollars so they're taking out
there that are canceling that
welcome and they're now taking
out a new loan four thousand
three hundred forty dollars is
that what you're asking and when
everything's done on that in
practice permitted under this
bill.
I would have to defer to my
experts on whether that practice
is permitted of I might indicate
most cases so it maybe the
second or third one where the
new loan would actually be less
than the original thousand but
out.
Myers that if you could very
just shortly the end almost yes
No whether that is permitted.
The
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto they
would be paying the amount of
the loan of the principal and
the interest to the date of the
payment off to the pay off
and that would be permitted.
That would be permitted yes
okay.
And and so and members of the
number of times and we can do
this.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto no.
So okay.
As part of this program with.
In terms of this bill.
When we
were leaving and risk management
office.
This option.
Under this bill.
What are the most generous
parents listen you know sort of
are training people badly and
probably still remember these we
just want to extend it more than
and state representative of the.
And then.
That.
Now is this is this is in.
We're trying to do with the
predatory.
Practices.
We that the approach.
What the practices which interim
cells.
Paris was.
Trying to.
The predatory practices.
Will stop.
This is
very frustrating.
I'm.
This I'm sorry.
The process is.
What.
Thank you practices.
Done in the industry.
What we're doing is is saying
Hey that's cool Mr Chairman
representative.
What are
you.
If you.
Want to see as to what
comprehensive approach.
Our students.
What practices work I'm here to
say.
That sounds.
And I'm and I'm programs.
What.
Problem solved.
Right now
three hundred sixteen dollars.
This.
Okay you're going to your ideas
consider.
It was resisted are once.
Press trust on that which is
now.
You know most of our remark
about.
Five hundred dollars so I take
out then.
Eighteen hundred dollars.
So I'm taking out.
What is it like June two
thousand dollars.
Chair on that loan.
Is your pond.
One
or five thousand seven hundred
and six months after going from
a thousand.
Are there I can barely I can't
understand it breaking up badly
against our.
In center this school slower
please.
Well it is.
Just.
On this issue.
This is.
It to me Rep Chris barrel.
In and out of thousands on.
And rules that are six months
Over three thousand dollars
thank you rural representatives
because Vince but does not stop
for practice.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto it
does stop the financial impact
in the extent of the impact
because the interest rate would
be much lower and so the actual
amount that they would would be
more in line with their ability
to repay it and it would also
allow a limitation to the
escalating costs so for example
if a thousand dollar loan at
thirty six percent you're not
going to have that kind of
escalation because it's thirty
six percent and not one seventy
five so I could see than I agree
doesn't stop the practice of
refinancing but it limits the.
Economic impact and it enhances
the ability of people to pay
back the loan because it's a
reasonable affordable right our.
Is.
Right.
Thank you for.
Miss brown does not stop.
Editori offices.
It is that.
And so I have a problem.
Yes Representative just
separating.
Stopping predatory practices.
Our Lady hi we're doing is
continuing.
That is problematic.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Baca
so you.
Thank you.
Mr chair one of the things I
want to talk about here is a
Senator Ivy Soto just touched on
as part of my practice I I focus
a lot on debtor's rights and and
creditors actually credit credit
enforcement that sort of thing
and so.
Of the one of the things I want
to talk about was that would be
refinancing of loans that that
refinancing of loans from
accreditors perspective many
times is is that if you have a
person come in and he is no R.
she is who ever borrowing a.
dollars say and they can't pay
it back in the re think finance
a loan and now with these it's a
hundred fifty dollars and so on
and so forth and and this goes
on there comes a point in time
Mr chair where that credit is
incurring a massive amount of
risk lending out that money and
so I I think you know even
though that practice does exists
that certain amount of risk that
they're undertaking that person
can walk in and file a
bankruptcy or what have you at
any point and have that debt
completely wiped away under
under bankruptcy law and so
credit is well aware of this and
so and and debtors have much
protection in that an example of
that is on the smaller loans of
the enforceability of these
loans if the debtor simply
doesn't pay and so that's what
we're seeing reflective in some
of these fees and some of these
interest rates so an example of
that would be great and then you
borrow two hundred dollars to
get yourself over to the next
paycheck.
And and once you once you do
that
You.
Thank you you don't you get paid
maybe don't pan back or you
don't have the money to pay them
back and so how do you enforce
that long well the simple answer
is this you don't enforce that
law because to go to a debt
collector HSD like that to
enforce a two hundred dollar
loan is an economical and so
that will never get some for
school we see enforcement coming
in isn't isn't higher loans you
know those about five thousand
dollars or more at that point it
becomes profitable to pursue the
loan so I you know this notion
that you know this is crumbling
of people's credit world in
getting the small ones I think
really doesn't hold a whole lot
of water because those loans you
know I'll be honest with you
they're never enforced and I've
been asked several times to
collect on loans like that and
you know the simple answer is
that that is no uncollectible
loans because simply put it will
cost you more to recover that
money and so that leads to the
next thing which is the which is
the debtor the data borrowing
the money I I you know I think
strongly disagree that this is
not an access to credit loan
this is definitely an access I
mean in access to credit issue
this is certainly an access to
credit issue invariably I get
people in my office that
want to file bankruptcy for
instance and so we start looking
at bankruptcy for them and
inevitably they want to get rid
of repossession you know that's
ten thousand dollars a credit
card maybe that's thirteen
thousand dollars guess who they
want to keep they want to keep
the X. Y. Z. title will linger
over there because they are
money when times are hard from
them and they want to keep that
relationship while under
bankruptcy law you're not
allowed to do that that's called
the preference so you have to
treat all the creditors the same
get rid of everybody what that
tells me.
He is that these people rely on
these local institutions and
I've had people sit in my office
and tell me that I couldn't make
it through and I have hard times
and inconsistencies in my work
and so sometimes I rely on these
people to lend me a few hundred
dollars the question gets asked
why don't you go to Wells Fargo
or larger institutions are
credit credit a credit union to
borrow this money and invariably
the answer is because they will
not lend the money because I
have bad credit and so at that
point the consumer reporter
thing to do they either do not
get alone if this place doesn't
exist or family will lead to the
money SO they go without for
that time and you know I can I
can tell you what countless
stories of hearing that story
and others like it so I kind of
cringe when I hear that this
isn't an access to credit issue
because it most certainly is
especially in rural communities
as much as we provide industry
distasteful and many times I do
I have seen those very
statements Mr chair that see a
hundred and forty percent
interest on a on a loan that if
that meant that that person was
able to each or make their so
full credit along around to get
a car payment in order to buy
some presents for the kids on
Christmas gosh I don't know that
they made it through the hard
spot I can tell you Mr chair and
and sponsors that they made it
through the Hartford spot
because of that little window
down the street who will
actually run the money when
nobody else will and you know I
I find it it's a it's
interesting to me to be sitting
here making this the argument
because you know many times I
see these statements and I'm
just appalled and and and I I
get outraged at times too but
there's a necessity there for
that type of land.
Because regardless of what some
of the the proponents argued at
the beginning of this a
presentation I can tell you that
these clients would go into the
bank and they would not walk out
of there with enough money for
what was needed at that time and
so these are lenders that will
give you a loan and as security
they were taken in tendo or next
stocks or TV or whatever just
read on the paper just eleven
the money and the and you know
those those are really not
forcible it's impossible to
collect of the collateral back
or to take that collateral back
on for just a couple hundred
dollars and so so you know with
that I'll just leave it at that
those are my experiences with
with debtors many debtors around
here both from from the tribes
in the pueblos and and here in
the town that I live
and and and some of the rural
areas and those of my clients
and I can tell you that you know
these these loans although all
high interest rate yes many of
them but your computing in their
fees if your computing a fifty
dollar fee in two hundred fifty
dollar loan that's a huge
percentage but if your computing
the fifty dollar fee into a ten
thousand dollar loan that's a
very small percentage and so I
think the the that other measure
of the P. R. is just
inconsistent with with what is
trying to be achieved here and
that is a different metrics such
as the interest rate of state
interest rate should be most
when computing this type of
thing but thank you thank you
for bringing four I know the
intent is good and it seems to
be a consumer protection but I I
think we in danger some of our
some of our most at risk
population here in New Mexico
with this bill thank you thank
you Sir bye all right committee
members I don't see any other
hands up we've gone a little bit
more than two and a half hours I
believe on the bill.
Senator Duhigg Senator souls I
believe you heard.
A great deal of information
about the billing concerns and
issues my understanding is that
you're amenable to having
actually steps to prepare
getting that to us I would ask
you to work hard to get that
committee substitute done
sometime tomorrow by the end of
the day tomorrow so that we
could to fairly distribute that
committee so
sometime tomorrow and I will
work with my staff to find a way
to figure out the when we do
have a committee support
amendment that we find a way to
publish that in a public
location you know what we're
good leadership in others who
may have suggestions about where
we do that so that those were
following a bill can and easily
access with that committee so it
looks like.
No that's an ambitious a task
for you center schools are doing
but I think in fairness of the
the given the interest in this
bill that that there ought to be
an opportunity for our perhaps
opposition to look at the
committee so that perhaps speak
with legislators are trying to
have a chance to speak with
legislators in advance that's
all with that I know to do that
so that's my plan will we'll
just consider this matter on the
table for now and will we'll
make sure that it's on our
schedule for Wednesday.
Right.
Mr chair if I might we certainly
can do that the the committee
sub is almost all technical
issues I did not hear any
specific proposals or other
substantive changes to the bill
of the left side the something
wild unfortunately I apologize
was off to the bathroom.
but yeah we will make that
committee said we will make it
available to all.
Thank you senator well I
appreciate the
some may consider those to be
technical changes are not I
won't get into the debate of
that but but simply to point out
that that some of the members
noted even the need for some
corrections even in what may
have been technical issues and
what my goal is to have bills
come out of this committee that
we're all very proud of looking
back in hindsight some I think
we all share that goal thank you
center sold in due to committee
members so we were.
To hear three seventy five I've
not yet heard from Senator when
you know this about a committee
substitute let me just check in
real quick with the Emily or Mr
not going to did we ever get a
committee so.
On three seventy five.
Yes Sir we do to all members and
to the analyst as well thank and
we know it's Senator meals
prepared to comment on that
committee so.
Mr chairman he is prepared I
just need to run to his office
and let him know about or at
okay is the Senate finance are
they out of Senate finance no
Sir just moments ago they were
still meeting but I believe
certainly knows is made those
arrangements to elect.
Well let's try to keep our
community gather let him keep
moving on and take some easier
bills that is Senator Antoinette
Sedillo Lopez with us still her
bill was pretty straight for
we've heard it before thank you
just want to put it in a
different place the law but I
don't see her on the call.
next.
We.
Yeah I I do Sir Senator Byrd
needs next on my list Senate
bill one forty six I'm standing
here tonight committee if you'll
allow for it thank you Sen bill
up to seventy five because we
heard it.
I'd like you to consider we owe
three seventy five because we
heard it.
I'd like your Senator forty six.
Because my understanding of the
history is that we have heard
this bill before September will
fill me in my understanding is
Senate has passed this before
and and so on because it it is
asking for because I understand
senator Byrd is adopted all of
the prior amendments that were
put on the bill that it has a
good shot at getting her and
then like twice in a one eighty
three
it mentally that is my bill but
once again it's filled
collateral consequences which
we've heard of past many times
through this chamber as well to
and so bad ambitious but I think
we can hear those four or five
bills before five thirty maybe
way too ambitious let's try cell
number so one forty six.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me OK Center o'neill we
take the chair for a few
moments.
Yes Sir I can you hear me OK yes
thank you senator Byrd up please
present your bills thank you
thank you Mr chair and committee
today I presented to the
committee Senate bill one forty
six and a Mr Chairman who just
left you are correct this bill
passed the house the Senate with
I think you know dissenting
votes last year it was a bill
that was sponsored a supported
by the governor and as it got to
the governor's desk the the the
attorneys on board found a
couple of technical issues that
they wanted to correct and so
they corrected that we brought
back the bill as as you see it
now and
it basically what the bill does
is the
governing body for the National
Guard across the United States
has
it recently updated and the
policies procedures and
regulations and what this bill
does is bring in New Mexico
up to that same level of
policies and procedures and that
really is the crux of the bill
again you all have an has seen
it last year and and it passed I
believe through the committee
unanimously with me right now is
my expert witness and that he
really is more expert than I am
at this and that is a the
general cannot nala the edition
General for the National Guard
here in New Mexico and I if I
may Mister chairman like to
defer to him for any comments
that he may have thank you
Senator general.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to talk about
this bill.
Thank you again to senator Byrd
for working with me this has
been a multi year process.
Mr chair members of the
committee again this was Senate
bill one seventy five in the
regular session last year it
passed unanimously through both
houses of the the language it
made its way to the governor's
office was in fact the amended
language that came out of the
Senate Judiciary Committee
there are two minor technical
changes that were made to that
bill of the first of it was in
our bill last year we were
expanding the governor's
authority to call out the
National Guard to assist with
search and rescue missions or
counter drug missions she did
not concur that that the
governor's authority to call out
the National Guard needed to be
expanded so that is one of the
technical changes that was
changed if you can refer to page
five of the bill line twenty
five the other place that were
defeated differs from the
language that was.
He recommended by the Senate
Judiciary Committee last year we
had language in there that said
the department of military
affairs in the cabinet level
departments they do not like the
terminology the cabinet level
department a cause confusion in
their mind and so we stricken
that let that the that
terminology out again the
department of military affairs
I'm not a cabinet secretary I am
appointed by the governor I'm
her military chief of staff but
I'm not a cabinet secretaries of
that cabinet level department
the they had a strike that
language out Mr chair members of
the committee again the
significant things of this bill
are that it operationalize the
state defense force you know
during this last year we've been
very involved we the New Mexico
National Guard has been very
involved with the COVID nineteen
response our state defense force
has been involved with limited
manner but had this law been
enacted last year would have
more volunteers to be able to
help us with our COVID nineteen
response I feel very strongly
that we have a great group of
volunteers in the state of New
Mexico that want to volunteer
our we need this law change to
allow us to be a lease and allow
the governor to be able to use
them.
Is that it does.
We're very limited for time
general and we appreciate your
comments can you the rapid test
yet yes Mr chair and members of
the committee again this is the
language that came out of the
Senate Judiciary last year and
we've just made these two minor
technical changes that's all I
have are ready for any questions
you may have Sir thank you
general and so Senator up can we
go to the committee yes okay
let's go to the committee
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sorry
R. I remember something about
that I agree I think that we
have some discussion about last
time
but but but still short just a
small question mark
know what we do in the committee
last time none of that was
affected by the change of the
governor wanted all of the
members are still in the bill
the way that we did it last
stretched out across Senator
pain was very involved with some
of the amendments.
Yes in the area that is correct
senator.
Mr Mr chairman if there's unless
investments are held on I'm
going to pass our next moderate
of the presenters.
Is there a second of the do
passed motion by Senator Ivy
Soto said.
Seconded by Senator Stewart pro
tem Stuart so
Is there any opposition to this
bill what is that question
investors more staff okay Mister
Fisher chairman of.
Hey.
It's gonna run on time.
You are mostly.
I just go quick process our
question Mr chair did you said
the governor wants to be to the
set X. Y. Z. these tuitions
destruction legislative veto
message.
No it was a block of the funder
correct.
So Mister chair so general how
do we know this is what you want
to share actually write
something down for us to to do.
I thank you Mr chairman and
senator this all came for all
this all came out of her office
is that to the adjustments that
and that she wanted and so it's
my understanding that you be
supporting if we get to our in
this fashion this year this so
so Mr Senator in general I think
that a separate conversation we
have in this chamber is that the
governor's veto something she
should provide us written
instructions would be our
message so we can actually work
on legislation it should be does
something instead of just doing
it in the dark of night she
actually gives us some pointers
white she should have on this
bill we can make sure we address
our issues so if you could take
back that message General that
if the governor wants us to fix
bills that we passed sure would
help it she actually took the
time the courtesy to the
legislators like senator Byrd
who worked his tail off to get
this bill passed unanimously
last year it's almost insulting
for just the pocket you know
something about state senator
Byrd really appreciate all your
hard work there's two things two
small things I need to get fixed
quite frankly I think it's
insulting prophesied just
discover all governors to it as
it we've had this conversation
rural center to share in the
past so take that message back
she wants better legislation
wants us to work with our have
the courtesy to after someone
what senator Byrd who works to
offer much solution are right
was a couple paragraphs tells
how we fix for should just be
those things thank you Mr
chairman senator Byrd for all
your continued hard work thank
you general thank you thank you
thank you.
What are Blair director here you
had your hand up did you want to
speak.
I'm.
Mr chairman we have a couple of
proposed amendments in the
committee that is unsigned I
want to committee members to
that in case it's anybody's
amendment who is present.
That's all thank you.
So do it does anybody want to
claim ownership of this unsigned
amendments.
It all depends what is a do.
Well.
Hey.
Okay.
Who is the sponsor of this
linesmen Mr chairman this is
this is a an amendment that we
had discussed offline with the
general Nava and we decided not
to presented at this time if
that be okay with the committee
because we have the bill was was
in good shape as it sits okay
thank you thank you so
Just about all right John I'm
not a new I'm assuming you're
back from your
Your confidential classified.
a diplomat team right as earlier
today Mr Chairman Senator yes I
am thank you.
What's what's the will of the
committee.
Press.
S. is there a second.
I second there you go okay so.
I'm.
Is there any opposition to this
to this motion.
Seeing none you have a a past
build us senator Byrd some of
the bill Burt of the bill caucus
thirty.
Thank you senator Senator
chairman bill for your
confidence and what we're doing
here and we appreciate it
on behalf of myself and the
general mailbox thank you to the
chairman and the committee thank
you all.
Mr Chairman is back thank.
Thank you for the brief break it
was needed do it we heard
anything from Senator Tallman on
Senate bill thirty eight.
Anyone.
We have heard from senator Tom
and he's in **** but he's ready
for his bill whenever you're
ready for him Sir.
The collateral consequences of
convictions at par with.
To do that and I'm also going to
look for Senator Sedillo Lopez
do we know where she's at.
Our.
This is.
Okay would.
Would you call for either
Senate.
Thirty eight or seventy five
either common or Sedillo Lopez
and just let him know that will
be joining.
Without hearing their bill if we
don't hear me we don't see in
about the next hour and then
we'll look for center my nose at
the same time at the end of the
day center Lara going to Senator
Ivey Soto all take your
suggestion the central New York
in the chair well I put on
Senate one eighty three
With the permission of you'd Mr
chairman of the committee one
eight three is the uniform
collateral consequences bill it
comes out of the uniform law
commission and what it does
effectively does is address what
we're referred to as collateral
consequences which are the
consequences of a criminal
conviction on the also through
the plea agreement and those
kind of consequences would be
things that affect your current
individuals access to our our
system of government two budget
to programs to other rights and
remedies as a result of that
conviction.
as a result as a result of the
way we pass laws we have these
collateral consequences
sprinkled throughout are statute
there in in any number of
different areas and and often
times hard to advise an
individual and accepting a plea
or being sentence what they may
be giving up as a consequence of
that so what this bill does is
required the sentencing
commission to gather all that
information in one place.
So we have it all centralized
number one and number two that
we are sure that the court and
counsel advising individually
for their sentence or in
connection with a fully of these
other collateral consequences of
their sentence the things beyond
the time those spent perhaps in
prison for the fines or
penalties but also advise what
those other consequences may be
members of the committee we
passed this before it was last
passed by me with uh Senator
Martinez I'm sorry by governor
Martinez who vetoed it after
Vito I did not make a subsequent
effort during her administration
to bring again because I assumed
it would meet the same fate the
reason for retail issue felt
that this was not the
responsibility of the state
government or the legislature
but the responsibility of
defense counsel to do and and
supposed to basically
principally on her background as
a prosecutor
earlier was that of the two
message.
I can't recall where there was a
veto message or not but I think
there was Center Ivey Soto there
was a written veto message and I
think it was actually I see Sir
I see that but what what do not
is that yeah I think I think she
was of the two messages such as
that this is this is a something
the defense lawyers need to do
and and now it's up to them to
do so
and so Mr chairman I disagree
with that but I wasn't about to
beat my head against a wall and
so decided way to add a new
administration might consider
look to this favorably I think
it's almost consistently met
with good support both house and
Senate and in a bipartisan way
so I have Jack Burton whose
uniform law commissioners to
answer any technical questions
and Mr chairman given the time
we spent on last the last Mr
Burgess to kind of stand by you
ready to answer questions as
they may arise but otherwise
we're we're ready for the
committee right thank you
chairman to the committee
anybody want to speak on this
bill that's very familiar to us
I feel like I know it from the
house my house days but anyway
question
Ivey Soto I mean Senator Stewart
sorry Mr chairman I have a point
of order so are you getting
information that we don't have
any public comment because we
took none of the last bill and
we going right to the committee
on this one so if you could just
notify us that you're not
getting any notices for public
comment then of that would be
great Senator I to point out to
the bill's sponsor of the last
bill if you wanted public
comment he would say so okay so
that's a choice I make as your
committee chair and so I if we
can please move on that would be
great and similarly with senator
survive just a few wants public
comment he can ask for it so
that's where I'm coming from so
okay so can we move on thank
you.
Members of the committee.
Comments on this bill Senator
Stewart we're on one eighty
three the bill is sponsored I I
was not Cherry during one forty
six I I I will be happy to talk
about those who asked to support
it but we heard from the
principal one Major General naba
on this bill we have no
individuals who in advance asked
to speak in support or
opposition and I have Jack
Burton only as my experts
Representative considers.
Thank you for telling me that Mr
chairman I appreciate it.
We'll take questions madam chair
yes
Mr Chairman.
Raise questions anybody have a
question on this bill.
We're not gonna previous bills.
would you pass.
Okay is there a second.
I think it's got word jackets
that the for the background
is a great background.
That's a great background.
We need to.
So the bills and seconded so
because we perhaps we should
call the roll of there's no is
there any opposition to this
bill.
Seeing none.
Chairman survive this have a due
pass.
I would like you to resume
chairmanship of this committee
thank you very much Senator
o'neill we've called to you out
of health public affairs I hope
they're functioning well without
you my preference would be to
hear Senate bill seventy five
center adds in that city Lopez
only because we've heard this
bill already fully in the
committee and Senator Sedillo
Lopez was going to go do a
little bit of surgery with that
that I think I understand it's
been done so.
Sierra the we'll hear you next
Sir but yours would be a hearing
we've not yet conducted so
Senator one seventy five centers
to deal opens please.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Your muted what began that
Andrea so this is one.
Mr chair Senator yes you are
more comment on this bill we are
before we go Mr chair we lost
each of you.
But we yes yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez were ready for you to
present your bill but I also
heard.
Senator Ortiz Pinos voice from
is committee so the are you
broadcasting is in your office
yes I have I have this your
committee on my cell phone and I
have the other.
The other
Now the waiting on on some
testimony by someone so very
quickly I can present this this
bill has you know I want to I'm
very very grateful of very
grateful for the this
suggestions that were made in
the last committee.
And senator you want I can also
changes in the substitute
Senator Sedillo Lopez I I
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Appreciate your desire to multi
task but it's not going to work
we need to have your undivided
attention in this committee so
you got to turn off the other
co.
The vote is what is happening
right now.
We have just heard commissions
earned about one not notice much
of it in here I'm sorry.
Excuse me.
Center city opens up.
We'll we'll we'll proceed
Senator comments bill will come
back to you Sierra are you
prepare your.
Thank you that's perfect I
appreciate that you're not
thirty eight center Thomas.
Senator Tallman I see your lips
moving and I hear nothing from
you Sir.
So.
This.
Yes it is and I'll note Center
o'neill your Mike is still open
in the.
Thank you senator Tom you have
to speak up Sir your voices
paint.
Your voice so Senate thirty
other this better I'm should
budget for us Sir go ahead
Senator thirty eight I'll note
that we have no one signed up in
advance on public comment again
thank you Senator Stewart for
remind me to check for that
Senator Senator thirty eight
Sierra.
I do have an expert witness to
this now the notified that she
is signed up she's assistant
general counsel for Verizon.
We don't have forever on my list
of of speakers but go ahead
identify her what is her name
name is Elizabeth great notice
and you an easy system general
counsel for Verizon.
All right Senator Thomas can you
imagine you present your bill
attachments.
I can do it in two minutes.
Elizabeth Nunez is joining for
some reason it's not happening
so.
Possible Sierra would actually
present the bill we might know
what it's about to be able to.
Yeah Sierra go ahead Sir okay I
think this would be a it's a
very straightforward simple
build.
It modifies the definition of
phone cramming to allow carriers
to include charges for non
communication goods and services
to customers telephone bill
provided the carrier's attain
the customer's permission.
Cramming was prohibited under
the under under a law.
In nineteen ninety nine much has
changed since then including the
now commonplace practice of
bundling.
Wireline and mobile mobile
broadband services with
applications such as data
storage and parental controls.
The proposed language would
allow non communication charges
to be added to wireless and
broadband voiced tele Commission
bills.
With customer permission that
community.
Nine telecommunication charges
added without a tell it without
a customer's permission would
remain training violations under
the proposed revised statute.
So there's no fiscal impact
reports with respect to this
bill.
And finally Mr chair we one of
the few states if not the very
last state to change the law to
permit tram.
So now I would like to.
The turn to and this newness for
her comments and as I said
before she's assistant general
counsel for Verizon thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
In two or three minutes please
explain the need for this
legislation.
We.
Members of the committee.
Very much for taking the time to
speak with us today I'm as the
senator said hi my name is
Elizabeth grain you just I am
government affairs counsel for
Verizon and this bill is I hope
the most straightforward bill
that you will hear entire
session but certainly today I'm
as it stands right now New
Mexico is the only state where
carriers like Verizon are
prohibited by law from charging
our customers for anything that
isn't that telephone service on
their bills so the best example
that I have of this is Disney
plus I'm on during the pandemic
Disney plus has become extremely
important to our daily lives and
in every other state when our
customers have finished a
promotional period of the free
here they're able to very
seamlessly elect if they would
like to opt in to continue
receiving their services for
Disney plus and billing through
Verizon there are a lot of other
services like that including
smart home devices security
devices for kids other things
like that all of which
frequently requires subscription
service and their other
conveniences that our customers
have enjoyed that we currently
have to say no when our New
Mexico customers want that and
that's because the New Mexico
statute has not been updated
since nineteen ninety nine so
we're we're trying to apply a
lot right now that was meant for
days when you know we I had a
car phone that we would get it
out from underneath the seat the
plug into the cigarette lighter
when we needed to use that to a
world today where we are using
our phones for everything from
and whether it's banking to home
security to entertainment it's
just a different world and we
want our customers to have the
same conveniences that customers
in every other state in the
country have so all this law
does is give customers the
option.
Of having those charges on their
telco bills thank it's still in
process and there are a lot of
both the state and federal rules
that govern how telephone
companies can do this to protect
consumers so with that I'll I'll
offer the committee I'm happy to
discuss this bill any questions
that you have our goal is to
make sure that our customers in
New Mexico have the best
experience possible.
Thank you thank you Mr yes all
right as I mentioned I didn't
have anyone who signed up in
advance to be heard in support
or opposition so we'll go to
members of the committee
Senator Duhigg I see you
actually recognize anyone else
this time.
Ms gray I see your lips moving
and I see your microphone open
but we're not hearing anything
you're saying I'm puzzled by
that.
I was also kind of puzzle that
you're representing Verizon we
had for resolvable reception.
But but anyway.
Bad luck this.
All I can say is that I really
receive my homes my home
internet service from another
provider.
Good cover there although that
may get you in trouble as well
Senator do it thank you Mr chair
so I'm wondering because I have
Disney plus two
and I'm wondering what.
What the need is to have these
services build through someone
like Verizon and also what if
there is a mark up on the cost
of these drugs if they are
billed through a third party or
a telecommunications company
At it is not clear to me why
this is why this is necessary
and and and why.
I'm wondering how does rise in
profit from doing this because
there's got to be some reason
Verizon wants to do this so so
would you mind giving us a
little more we're back from
that.
Absolutely so I'm gonna start
with your last question which is
why Verizon wants to do this
there are two reasons in in
short the most obvious is that
right now we have to tell our
customers know a lot in New
Mexico this is a matter of
making New Mexico's law
consistent with how this issue
is handled in every other state
in the country and under federal
rules so right now we do the
second reason is is a business
operations recent right now we
do a lot of disclaimer writing
we do a lot of excluding New
Mexico customers from
promotions that allow them
convenience no we set up our
systems so that many many times
you'll go through check out
window and then it'll go oops
this person is in New Mexico we
can't let them do X. or Y. so it
is a matter of updating the
state's telephone collector to
reflect just the realities of
today when this law was passed
it was in a world where you
could you could be charged for
receiving a text message even if
you hadn't wanted that text
message to be sent to you and
technology has changed a lot so
that's that's the goal is to be
able to offer our customers in
all fifty states the same
experience which matters to us
and to our bottom line partially
we want our customers to have a
good experience but also because
it is a business operations
issue for us.
I thought you raise your hand I
want to make sure you can hear
me.
I.
I can hear you yes.
Okay I'll pause there and see if
you want well so I guess.
rise and not make any money I
having these services be but
look through them rather than
through the services themselves.
No
no.
We don't think there's Senator
members of the committee Mr
chair we do not there's no
additional there's no additional
cost in terms of customer.
This is a matter of making sure
that our customers have that
convenience
store right around the time
remember a couple years ago a
lot of carriers started offering
you get Netflix with your why
are you know with your wireless
service or you get a certain
number of months free for
something else and so this was
something that we you for us
this is a convenience that we
offer our customers and there
are types of non telco services
that we would like our customers
to be able to purchase through
us that they cannot currently do
today in New Mexico a great
example of that is is certain
types of smart home services or
security services that because
they don't they are not
classified as telephone services
under New Mexico law were
forbidden from selling them to
New Mexico customers so there's
no there's no premium there's no
extra fee for having this build
three your telephone carrier
instead of buying it directly
from the company if the
convenience issue only.
Mr chair missing as is.
Does the does the Telek
telecommunications company get
the benefit of that customer's
data from this third party
platform and anyway
I am is to be used for marketing
purposes by doing this
consolidated billing.
That completely depends on the
situation and the set up what I
can tell you is that that's
something that customers would
be aware of when they stepped
out for the infringement.
So it would depend on what you
agree with each particular
service the arrangement for who
can see your data and who can
analyze it might be different
between you and apple and
Verizon and then it might be
between you and T. mobile flex
or another partnership that it's
it's an individualized basis
that's not something that this
law would affect in one way or
another this is purely giving
the option right now all of New
Mexico lost says you can't
telephone companies can't bill
customers for anything that
telephone services and what our
bill does is add the phrase
without their consent so that
the customers have the option if
they would like to right now
they don't.
You Mr chairman missing as SO if
I consents to new Disney plus
bills through my Verizon account
and I then have a billing
dispute about that I'm I'm
getting the trouble bills for
the Disney I lost subscription
who who's going to resolve that
issue is a Verizon or as a
Disney plus and are there
there'd.
Our terms are agreed to Disney
plus are those honored by
Verizon and how how does what's
the interplay there.
So again it it doesn't
individual basis but if the if
the charge is on your bill with
Verizon and I'm gonna speak
specifically about Verizon but
this is true for any carrier
under the federal cramming bowls
if thank if the charge is on
your bill from the carrier.
Your your interaction with.
About that charge on your bill
is going to be exclusively with
that Kerrier and that carrier is
accountable to you for resolving
any dispute that you have
regarding a billing issue as
well there are very very
detailed requirements for
companies under federal and
state rules in terms of working
with customers who have a
dispute so when I first started
working on this issue I put
myself through the training that
we do for our customer care
agents will handle issues when a
customer has a question about a
charge on their bill that is not
a telco charge and I am very
comfortable saying that we work
with our customers on the bill
disputes as though it were a
part of their bill that was
related to a Verizon product or
service.
Mr chair that that's all I have
for now.
You Sir do show answer
recognition anyone else on this
bill Sir Moores.
Thank you Mr chair so if someone
doesn't pay that rise and bill
doesn't go to collections.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think that question
is for me I'm gonna jump in so I
think what you're asking and
please correct me if I'm wrong
is that if someone doesn't pay
their bill for something that
isn't telephone services like
I'm just going to keep using
Disney plus would that affect
whether or not their bill for
their phone services went to
collections over answers Lopez
rebozo smile.
one smile for.
Under federal law.
there's the customers actually
your charges for telephone
services have to be sent out
separately in your bill for
charges from non telco services
they have to be clearly labeled
they have to be in a different
spot in terms of all that that
this is a separate section and
if you have charges but with you
if you have charges on your bill
for non telco services those
those charges being delinquent
cannot under federal law to be
used to impact your phone
charges so in other words if you
owe on your Disney plus account
that can't be used to disconnect
your phone service they're
treated as two separate buckets.
It's just new internet school on
and off Mr chair solves with
that that.
Senator Moores anyone was the
committee.
So yes thank you
we did have some difficulty with
your your internet connection
you know to the video and the
audio not in sync even now it
seems as though your videos
different than your voice.
This experience gave me a good
idea we've had a lot of
legislation this session about
broadband and reliability and I
I think what we should do is
each member in the call should
have to disclose to their
internet service provider is
at all times before at the end
of every call so we begin to get
an idea.
The who we should be used for
our internet service providers
and who not to be using all of
think about that for one of my
dummy bills.
Members of the committee on
center Commons Senate thirty
eight are there any other
questions of the committee.
Closure of the committee for a
motion.
All
we would do passed for you
Senator Tallman.
Lopez will suck.
All right Emily you have here
with us we need to roll call on
this one for me please.
All right quick.
Yes.
Senator do
now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Last.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Moores.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank
know.
Senator Ivey Soto.
This yes although with the book
I think of I did agree to do
past motion sales my correct
Emily yes.
Chairman regrettably we do not
have to pass a motion thank you
for being the committee today
thank you miss millions of thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you Senator Mario Senate bill
three seventy five you're going
to bring that back you're
supposed to be number one today
center my nose what happened.
I was busy drafting that demi
bill to change internet provider
maybe we can just do it language
in house bill two good good I
think I think that we should
every screen should show my name
and she show my name and that is
my internet service provider is.
You know what we would say if we
would see our ours anybody.
It was where are per service
would improve measurably no
doubt in my mind very quickly.
I can agree with you more.
You are muted Senator somebody
needed you.
How that works it's probably
probably a Comcast I think there
might current service provider
I'm sure they're the ones who
commuted me
Senator when you know if you
were going to go do some work on
the bill you were supposed more
first up today to get done yes
Sir it did we brought you a
substitute bill and so I don't
know if you want to the motion
first are honesty going such to
cover you'd like I was just
gonna proper motion of a do not
pass in a do pass on the
committee so anybody want to
make that motion.
Senator Lopez will make the
motion on Senate three seventy
five.
Senator Lopez your muted yes yes
I'll make a motion Mr chairman
all right thank you to do not
pass on Senate bill three
seventy five with a do pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substance present.
Senator windows what did we ask
you to do what did you do it
what did you not do.
We did everything you asked us
to do.
you know we went back and fix
the language issues we added the
turning general we have this
money in for litigation for the
turning general in case that
happens we put him as the chair
of the law enforcement academy
board.
And put that back on and so.
with the committee substituted
it really gives the officers the
best training they can the best
standards and all the tools to
hold bad actors accountable
but includes Attorney General
which I talked about it provides
money for the litigation for
prosecutors for the bad actors
and resolves conflicts that you
guys identified by the
legislative staff such as moving
overlapping roles of the two
boards and clarifying that
funding is recurring.
Our goal complete with this bill
is to stop bad behavior I've
experienced it you've heard me
talk about on the floor so
that's where we're headed the
Sims two matches the language it
does a little bit more including
the funding for the education
and I think will stand for
questions and I believe age
eighty four days on the could
someone let AJ and from the
waiting room.
Are you.
Okay he's in the office Senator
Ingle had last time
okay.
In New Mexico total number
please for the what is up.
Committees from me Senator
Kernan subtotal Senator that is
two two zero.
One four point one.
That is a committee set.
Senator knows the before I go to
the committee would you just
tell us we met I'm extensively
on your bill on Friday
you may I realize maybe delegate
some of your of some of the
tasks to others can you tell us
what happened between the
meeting Friday and today mad
exacting for example and you
giving us a summary of what was
said addressed by the committee
but was there anything more
editor was anything not done
thank you told us it was not
there was nothing that was not
accepted but just just take this
quickly very quickly through the
process so you followed after
Friday.
I will A. J. were you taken
through the process I did
actually get on the road I know
that but I want to make sure I
don't miss anybody it agent can
commute hello Matt and Andrew
drafted this up and did we match
our changes and anything else
that we at that they're not
seen.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee aged forty of the
municipally of.
I had several conversations over
the weekend.
In Mr chairman with your staff
with other members of the
committee one additional ad that
was widely discussed on Friday
was adding the Attorney General
back in but in addition to that
making sure that the attorney
attorney general's office
specifically litigation today.
Properly funded to deal with.
These litigated matters matters
when it comes before the need
wanted to make sure they have
the funding available to want to
deal with these cases so that
was additional advocate from.
Recommendations from the
committee.
What funding are we talking
about how much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee same funding source so
the reversion from the law
enforcement protection fund goes
to the general fund it's just a
diversion of that so there's
even after everything is done
this bill successful they're
still two and a half million
dollars line that goes to the
general so we just get
additional intercepted that to
properly fund education part.
How much is the intercept.
Thank you two hundred fifty
thousand recurring.
To the aging.
Yes Sir into their litigation
department.
Thank you.
Committee members questions I'm
looking for hands on the
participants or on the screen
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez Eric I'll try to
find that unmute button Mr
chairman but thank you and I
appreciate the work that was
done this weekend and I
appreciate chatting with you and
AJ also.
The I I just had one more I'm.
Look on this one and I think I
had mentioned it previously Mr
chairman and that would be on
page four line twelve.
I'm I know of where the board
and this is just the training
boarded Mr chairman the Attorney
General is added back in for the
training portion not for the of
the other board that this bill
is creating he you just would
prefer to be in the basic
training aspect.
but in page four line twelve.
And this is just a clarification
Mr chairman
normally there's a a construct
with this bill would go through
rules when it you would have in
state
The board shall be composed of
the Attorney General the
director of the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy and the
directors of all the satellite
law enforcement academies should
we not at least how many law
enforcement academies do we have
Mr chairman.
Two three.
Senator question I'm speaking up
I'm sorry that I'm back in you
should chief you see chief
Johnson.
Can you let Johnson in the call
please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee if I may there's nine
but the reason we didn't specify
is in case there's another
academy to added we didn't want
to have to come back then
statute again if there's another
county to get added on the
Representative.
Okay because I just want to just
a clarification because if you
leave that open in normal you
try and keep it within a a nice
compact if you leave it open
ended then it's just the
construct that we usually look
at we were talking about boards
and commissions because the
state an additional seven
so I just wanted to point that
out to committee is just usually
at the construct that we have or
numbers that are associated with
boards so otherwise that was it
Mr chairman thank you thank you
Sir Lopez anyone else on the
committee.
Closure of the committee.
And Senate three seventy five
committee so Mister I just I
guess I'm I'm a little.
one.
But in two thousand dollars
annually into the ages on
additional measures.
Mr.
Director question please to the
ThinkCentre when does that right
center we don't have to open
microphone Sir.
Sounds like your question is
directed to senator Munoz center
this on.
Yes I'm sorry Senator Ivey Soto
could you repeat that question
for you real quick thank one
million two hundred thousand
dollars a year into the engines
litigation graduated from the
wrong person can meet Casey
needs to okay seeing.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman center in
case you need to litigate
something with the bad actor
about officer that that he's
going to be required to
litigate.
But.
Mr chairman this isn't his job.
Mr chairman and senator I
believe that is A. J. when you
talk to the Attorney General it
in the state you that money for
the education.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Yes the store the VAT Department
has been under but and and
specifically the litigation
department when you get one of
these.
Officers that really takes it to
the mat.
It takes extensive resources to
do that instance we're
streamlining winding process we
want to make sure they have
enough money in their budget to
litigate these cases and again
in discussions with members of
the committee that was that was
a request to I think it's added
and also in conversation with
the Attorney General.
Never miss chairman and and
someone else.
That's not restricted for this
purpose that's just simply going
to use a much bigger deal with
whatever they want it's.
Representative.
Is that correct.
Mr chair.
Senator yes that's correct.
Yeah.
I'm I'm I'm sorry I.
I I get I get the call from
doing their job.
But but I think that's what the
general fund is.
Is permanent other job.
And and and and so I I just have
a problem that the mission and I
would I would member of the
Senator Lopez I think she has
something on this point.
It will business center Ivey
Soto you're going to work on a
proposed amendment to the
committee set up Senator Lopez.
Mister chairman Senator I'm.
Really what the AG's office has
R. two persons who are assigned
the litigation and they are
backed up so much at this point
in time trying to keep up with
the cases that are in front of
them they don't have sufficient
of attorneys you can take this
to court so I believe that with
this additional money they'll be
able to hire and.
Keep up with you know all the
different cases that they do
have that are in front of at
this point and I don't remember
the Mr chairman exactly how many
they are behind that they are I
think of there is many they're
on the list that I know I've
heard before testimony so I
think that this money if you
wish to tighten it up maybe just
a little bit specifically I
think that maybe something more
amenable but we don't fund
properly in my estimation.
of these cases thank you.
Mr chairman and and and
Semenya's I guess I'm wondering
if it just before the parent if
we added.
Expressible for the purposes of
this act.
It says between them get in this
morning.
Works.
Matters.
I think that's duly noted in and
that would.
Fix the problem of of money
being spent where it should be
spent and using for litigation
so I I agree with that.
My kids and the prior I make my
motion just yoga center doing I.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
minnows at this might just be my
lack of understand how this
stuff works but with this these
funds if they're not used for
the person act.
Would they then revert to the
general fund or would it with
this be reverting or non
reverting fund.
Mister chairman Senator it would
be general fund money and it
would be reoccurring and so it
would be appropriated it's not
creating a fund so one B. B. B.
A. current any on fund balances.
Could be of the we appropriated
are because revert to the
general fund and then be re
appropriated for the following
year.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
Mr Chairman R. I would on page.
Our.
R. I would move that we insert
the words to be X. to be honest
exclusively for the purposes of
this it's.
By the way what we're going to
use it in a variety of different
ways on in terms of in terms of
their responsibilities under
that act.
That our communication issues
that there have to be.
Senator when you know so
committee members to practice
your would be because this
committee set up your revert
revised version Committee sub
that would come up with this
change so we're on that proposed
change by Senator Ivey Soto
other discussion on that
proposed change.
I'm not seeing any other members
I'd like to address that center
Ivey Soto
I'm concerned about the entire
idea of putting two hundred
fifty thousand dollars into the
AG of budget in this way.
We didn't discuss this on Friday
to my memory.
this somehow happened between
the time we gave direction on
the wishes of the committee to
the bill and discussions that
took place over the weekend.
My understanding is that the
conversation just took place
between Mr fourteen for the
municipal league I think and
perhaps the AG directly is what
it sounds like.
My my my feeling was also that
if the AG needed money.
More money and I clear my good
colleague center Lopez and and
center and other senators I
thank the agency needs more
money.
For their for their agency and
you should be here.
Not H. you should've been here
on Friday.
AG should have weighed in on
this bill we talked about that
on Friday we didn't have the AG
here we were taking the AG out
my attitude was of the AG cared
about being taken out they would
have been there they weren't
there and so I assume they
didn't care.
And today we've got the H. G.
essentially with all due respect
working through the municipal
league to trying get two hundred
fifty thousand dollars more into
their budget.
Initially without any strings
attached is put into a fifty
thousand dollars more their
budget Senator Ivey Soto
proposes to tighten that up some
but I'm still troubled by the
notion that that we've got folks
here said the eighty doesn't
have enough money to do its job
the AG's office historically
underfunded I understand that.
And I think I could probably say
that about the public defenders
and the district attorney's and
about the judiciary and about
the state engineers office and I
go down my list.
It seems highly unusual to me to
be trying to get a reoccurring
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars into the AG's budget in
this way this seems highly
unusual to me I'm troubled by
the if the AG needs money age
you should be going to Senate
finance asking for that money
and showing and demonstrating
that need rather than really I
think translucent air.
I I just find that really
troubling and and not and not a
good president
I would want this committee to
no I believe Mr Lara going to is
on the this and I will confirm
this with him later it has been
my practice this session this is
the first session that I chaired
the Senate Judiciary Committee
we invited the attorney
general's office to present to
the committee in the same way we
did to the judiciary
and in my experience in passing
the house the AG would typically
come and speak to the committee
and present historically a
package of legislation proposed
changes in laws and also to
address the needs of the
attorney general's office this
committee none of that happens
anymore I think that's I think
that's not.
Good
there used to be a far greater
participation between the AG's
office and and this committee
and the legislature as a whole
but I I I I do but I I do have
some very strong opposition to
the motion of of putting money
into the budget in this way
despite your representative Ivy
Soto to tie this up it leaves me
in a difficult situation.
I am inclined to vote for your
amendment to try to put some
tightening on this but I
fundamentally object to the two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
being put into the the bill in
this way and without without
center my nose if they want more
money in their budget they need
to come see you Sir.
All right thank you committee
members others I tend to think
of New York in order if we were
to prove this ammendment and
then consider whether or not
that that production system the
little.
That's that's my intention
Senator Ivey Soto thank you I
agree with you all right we're
on the proposed amendment
further discussion on the
proposed amendment any others.
All right is there any objection
adoption of that amendment.
Saying that amendment is adopted
Senator Ivey Soto you would
still have the floor.
All right thank you anyone else
in the committee.
All right.
I propose the committee that we
strike Senator Lopez we try to
get my attention.
No.
Senator Lopez.
Chair Senator Lopez is digital
and is racist okay my apologies
Mr chairman G. if I may say Mr
chairman our Attorney General is
I'm listening he was wondering
if you can get on.
The committee.
To address the questions.
We'll look looking for his name
we have we have a we need to
link Mr chairman we need to send
a link.
All right.
Well I think that makes some
sense.
Let's do this let's.
I was trying to get into the
call.
Can you find a way to get the
Attorney General link.
This will make every effort to
do that Mr chairman for your
information the committee's
information we have invited the
Attorney General to this
committee to make a presentation
and regrettably
he has demerged.
No I will try to email address
yeah I think I think that's what
was my point the committee
earlier in the committee for a
long time Senator that's a
that's not the precedent that
I've experienced with prior
Agee's but anyway be that as it
may what I I think in fairness
the AG should be heard on the
issue.
all continue to express my
concerns about the way this is
being done in the way it was
done but anyway Mr what it what
it will trying get the train
general link I think in fairness
he should have that opportunity
this hearing.
So with the committee's
permission we will.
Move back to Senate Bill.
Seventy five.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Also bill we've heard I think we
can make short work of hopefully
certainly does a bill let us
move off your bill for a few
moments while you trying get the
Attorney General into the
committee meeting Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senate Bill.
Seventy five of the committee is
stay with me Senator delivers
referred referred your bill
we were concerned about you
trying to put these restrictions
into the government conduct act
my understanding is you found a
better place for it.
Yes yes Senator in thank you
meant so much for this
opportunity the committee sub
places this legislation has a
standalone Act but within
chapter ten.
and if you want I could explain
the the committee substitute
there were other suggestions as
well Senator so it's Ivey Soto
so this committee substitutes in
and of was at to take into
consideration all the comments
and and concerns expressed by
the members.
Mr chairman of the total number
please.
Okay.
What is your cell number please
my my of.
My Prince would cut off the
bottom.
For.
The two oh two number is two two
zero.
Zero nine three point one.
Thank you Mr chair some of our
practice of Rinker please are
particularly with with community
service or other things that
nature that that can be found on
our website will get certainly
emails we don't have a book in
front of us it would be very
helpful and make sure that
everybody starts off with two
two number is that we can all
provide excellent point thank
you.
Senator Ivey Soto meant us so
with the two oh two number our
you fighting the the amount of
the sub section emails and then
and rules in order to send it
all to us members are from able
to do a search of the children
are okay very good yeah and I
was wondering whether there was
any place on the legislative
website where the committee
Cephas posted I guess you to I
mean it is not.
Correct.
Right committee members not so
anything that has not been
passed back in the is not on the
website right so right so you
still have the floor really.
I just got a permission I'm
going to route the approach very
very good it any other committee
members with questions.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you said
you made changes other than my
concern my concern the recall
was putting this into the
government conduct act right so
they did not belong and I
appreciate you finding a
different place in the law to
put but it which really makes
some sense but I think you
indicated that you made other
changes based.
Would you do would you tell us
what those were place yes thank
you Mr chair so Senator Ivey
Soto made an amendment about
treating the social security
number in individual tax I did
identification definition
And I I included that however I
only applied it to this act not
just in general because the
amendment the way it was was cut
it was seems very broad and so
the reason the Legislative
Council Service said that the
definition was very was because
of its breath it had potential
unintended circumstance the
consequences it would end up
applying to all statutes not
justice act and for many
statutes a social security
number requirement is not meant
to be satisfied by an I. ten
such as statutes relating to
driver's license applications
eligibility for public
is sentenced assistance and
certain tax benefits so wanted
to make clear to Senator Ivy
Soto that the amendment was a
little bit more limited than he
had sick that day and.
We this includes the concept but
not exactly has the amendment
was if that makes sense and then
since our bill is no longer in
the need in the General Connacht
Act we had to add penalties
because of otherwise you just
the original bill did not have
penalties and enforcement
language and we did not we we
the if you look at the bill is
for the substitute it includes
Discipline a violation of the
non disclosure of sensitive
personal information act
requests for discipline
including dismissal demotion or
suspension which tracks
The page which is what you would
apply to any employee and then
it does include of the first
stage of what applies to the
general in the General conduct
act
that is a civil action but it
stops short of any jail any jail
time or any criminal penalties
because the goal is not to
prevent or correct unlawful
disclosures the I mean the goal
is to prevent and correct
unlawful disclosures not to
criminally prosecute anyone and
so that was another good reason
to take it out of the General
conduct act
we also know that there was a
concern that the general conduct
act apply to all public
employees from local and state
your jurisdictions and elected
officials not just state
employees so by taking the
legislation out of the general
of the.
Of.
The conduct act.
Misconduct act we believe that
we've addressed the co confusion
about who this bill applies to.
So the goal of the dual goals of
this bill is are to create a
uniform standard for state
employees across the state how
they must handle New Mexicans
personal and sensitive sensitive
information and also to
encourage some of the most
vulnerable new Mexicans to
participate with the state and
it sends a strong message that
no one should we worry about
their sensitive personal
information being divulged and
so with that I stand for
questions on the committee
substitute.
Use already so.
Operable Mr chairman let them to
send a representative to win the
general and the issue of social
security number and the
individual tax identification
number I think I think I bring
it as a as a separate act
included in that manner I think
it does it doesn't threaten our
other marks
it gets to to the point that
you're trying to get to are with
regard to this bill so so thank
you very much for looking beyond
the language or the amendment
was and and instead
reflecting the discussion that
we have with regard to that.
A suggest actually and and and
representative government agency
because we're we're cleaning
hacks there's more in an act
that you know we've got
was a three sections as actors
really are the four section act
on subsection of section two.
Sure which is definitions
transaction it should be section
with the way that would be it
this is as much as an subsection
be sure.
Shipment the second section of
the bill of rights.
And in the standard language on
you know as used in the
non disclosure of sensitive
personal information on
that's are you got the two
definitions which would be and
the instead of one and two and
then and then the next steps are
the new section three what many
section two.
And basically just background
all of the paragraph
resignations by one as you know
rights are also a cause just
paragraph in the numbers one
through are not become a through
G. or whatever the whatever it
would be and are you and then
section three would become
section for but so Sarmad are
just simply a house Mr chairman
that we operate with impassable
due to pass on a point to
version and that the that that
we just simply move the
definitions and what's on
section as a standard.
Thank you Mr chair that is a
very friendly amendment.
So Senator Ivy Soto just so that
all the staff is clear and
hopefully we shot a lot of great
day it's not going to help
you're still on the call.
Strong organizations office but
I think you probably know he's
here sure it'll it'll be
important because you'll be
working with the.
With Senator Sedillo Lopez to
make sure that we get at the
point two version of this right
but Senator Ivey Soto
announcing.
Okay all right good they see it
said sub subsection B. of
section two really becomes a new
section three effectively is
that right we're also owns a
section soon subsection B.
becomes section to.
And then and then section to
become section twenty.
In the bill right short title
definitions the body and
reinforcement of the got it.
Enforcement become session for
that's right.
Right.
Philip everybody got that.
Center city Lopez got that too.
We saw.
then the next so which is anyone
else on the committee.
On the proposed committee
substitute Mr
on and I do not pass on Senator
seventy five and to pass the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five point two.
Take that take that motion so do
with the second just a couple of
thoughts ability what is now
section three page three.
New material enforcement
penalties.
Subsection aces a privation of
this is grounds for discipline
including this Medicine
dismissal demotion suspension I
really don't think you need that
Senator
you know you're saying a
violation here to meet the
discipline and here's the
possibilities for discipline
that's always going to be true I
presented an employment contacts
I don't think that we need to
put that in statute.
Also subsection eight doesn't
make sense to me subsection B..
provides gives authority
Attorney General district
attorney or the ethics
commission to initiate a civil
action I think we should talk a
little bit about what we would
have the state ethics
commission.
Instituting a civil action for
violation of this law.
She wondered about that little
bit over the weekend although I
grant a little bit we had a we
had a former judge make certain
ethics complaints in the press.
Against the speaker of the
house.
I was puzzled by that because my
understanding of the where
ethics law was to work that was
expressly prohibited.
and what the judge there would
be a violation of the ethics
commission act but I may be
wrong about that this will
figure that out later sixty
center this is shaking of heads
up I don't mean to get too far
afield but the question really
have in the bill before us is
what do we want to have the
ethics commission instituting
civil actions.
For violation of this act I
think that's a question really
for you center city level so
I'll give you to my questions
whether subsection a really is
appropriate in the in that was
no section three would become
section for do we want to have
the ethics commission convince
me that please and
The last sentences relief may
include apart from the five
permanent or temporary every
injection restraining order or
other appropriate order I think
most of that language is
superfluous and unnecessary
you can always get a permanent
or temporary juncture
restraining order for violation
of the law on the you have to
say that your your last part
there it has a civil penalty of
two hundred fifty dollars for
each violation not to exceed
five thousand dollars I think it
probably makes sense to have the
civil penalty in their.
What would constitute a
violation would be a fight.
At some point down the road
and I don't know how we would we
would determine that and then
and then you have to tell me why
you want to cap the the total of
five thousand dollars I'm not
saying that you should have a
cap but but it seems somewhat
arbitrary to me so that there's
a number of questions in our
center city Lopez but help me
help me feel a bit better about
your now section three please.
Thank thank you senator those
are are very good questions we
just tracked the government
conduct act but stopped short of
the criminal penalty because I
was very careful carefully to to
when you say if we pass a bill
with no consequences there's not
much to it and so I thought it
was important to put the
consequences for violating
For violating this sensitive
conduct act actually some teeth
to it I
I felt the same way about what
you just said about you could
it's always grounds for
discipline but when we talked
about the last version of the
bill there was concerned because
I kept saying to this committee
well I wouldn't expect people to
the ethics committee to come in
right away I would expect that
the matter would be unemployment
matter and so that they would be
progressive discipline a warning
a letter of dismissal demotion
suspension and I I said that and
I would of somebody asked me
well it's not in the bill and
and I said well that's always
the case when you're dealing
with an employment matter but it
was not accepted so that's why I
was more specific this time to
include it since it's a
standalone bill and I thought
that it would cause this bill
will also be used as training
for employees I I just thought
you're you're you're you're
correct it's redundant I just
thought it would it raise some
clarity about it and with regard
to
To the civil action I will defer
to I answered myself yes I
believe that we just tracked the
the and and Brandon Cummings I
believe it was just tracking up
to should stopping short of of
criminal
Consequences it was just
tracking the government conduct
act but if you think that
Remember the goal is simply to
stop the disclosures and I truly
believe that the threat of
getting fired for disclosing
which is probably the most
effective.
I'm reading the ethics
commission is just another
consequence.
But I do almost all feeling but
I will ask a I will defer to my
experts MUSTELLO yes.
Thank you let me just because I
have a quorum right now we're
just trying to ask some specific
questions and then we'll see
We propose Senator that you
strike.
Hey from page three section
three and you would effectively
eliminate subsection.
B. and just make that all part
of the enforcement section I
just don't think subsection a
needs to be in the statutes
that's my motion.
And then just leave me alone.
We'll be really beauties be
striking be because you wouldn't
have to be anymore so that was
okay of course of.
I would consider that friendly
because I agree with you totally
that since is an employment
matter that would be the proper
way to handle it I just want to
confirm that with my expert.
Mr chairman members of the
committee as long as there is an
opportunity for the education
peas that's the most important
right the graduated discipline
the education piece that the
that the that the ethics
commission does have within G.
CA that's kind of what we're
getting at and so
I assume that they could buy we
did with the rest on on your
judgment Senator that they could
do that kind of discipline
leading up to the civil it the
civil penalties if that makes
sense we just want to make sure
that there's an education
component and that there are
several graduated ways for them
to deal with people who are
violating this act because at
the end of the day what we're
really trying to do is ensure
that people if they are doing it
consistently there are there is
some team behind getting them to
stop doing it but also giving
people an opportunity to correct
their behavior if they either
didn't know what that that this
was the policy of course they
were inadvertently
violating it thank you right
committee members of the
committee members on the
proposed amendment.
Questions anyone.
Is there any objection to
adoption of that amendment.
Mixing that amendment will be
adopted to the committee so
point two version Senator Ivy
Soto refer to Phillip I'm
trusting you to keep track of
all of those.
This can you repeat your
amendment to one more time
please yes when what is now page
three of the committee
substitute.
What what is the line fourteen
fifteen and sixteen would be
struck.
Tracking subsection eight.
Subsection A. is struck in the
subparagraph B. online seventeen
is eliminated.
In that section just begins with
the Attorney General.
Thank you okay thank you.
The second amendment that I
propose is.
Online twenty one.
Striking a languages as relate
may include permanent or
temporary injunction restraining
order or other appropriate
order.
I think that it should rated
Use the report released.
The last maybe Senator Ivy Soto
others.
The the languages usually of
the.
Penalties for violation.
Shell be a civil penalty of the
two hundred dollars for each
violation not to exceed five
thousand but striking really the
words relief may include.
All the way through.
Other appropriate order.
To really remember every right
that sent a state penalties for
violation.
Of this act.
Shell be a civil penalty of.
Eliminate what I consider to be
a necessary language about
allowing for permanent temporary
injunction Center you don't see
a point to any that.
That's my proposed amendment.
Senator Sedillo Lopez twenty
amendment I believe that that is
a friendly amendment
Just confirming with my expert.
Because you're you're correct
Senator they can always insisted
they can always get of
restraining order and injunction
that's just the nature of taking
at a case to court so you're
absolutely.
Yeah you're gonna you're gonna
find one thing about me Senator
Sedillo Lopez
like you I I've been branching
Law thirty years with pricing
longer than me I spent my whole
day reading your books and
opening them up in the figure we
make them the length there we
make them with all kinds of
language and I think the
necessary drive me crazy I'm
trying to always find ways to
say the same thing in fewer
words.
Make all of our jobs a little
easier so I appreciate you
consider that a friendly
amendment it is there other
committee discussion on the
proposed amendment.
There any objection adoption
that amendment.
Right seeing none will will make
that amendment to the next
version Committee so that's all
of the comments that I have
suggestions that is Senator
Sedillo Lopez any other
committee members now on our
committee substitute as we put
forward as of version two.
All right.
Do I still have a quorum.
Two thirty.
We have lost our.
It's what I was afraid of.
Will you give me a moment let's
see what I contract out here who
am I missing.
No but I can find I'm Madam
second about a combined one more
miss.
Me to second meeting.
So I just checked with Senator
Ivy Soto he's in House Judiciary
right now let me try a couple of
other alternative the committee
will be patient with me for just
a moment or two please.
Many dollars.
The committee.
Senator Stewart we have a quorum
back again and Senate judiciary
thank you
we
We are on a to pass.
For Senator Sedillo Lopez this
bill that we
last week and has been through
the committee substitution
process so we're on a new path
for a committee set up to
percent bill seventy five with
several amendments made to this
committee that will work
themselves into a point two
version of the committee so
we've gone through all of the of
the person who wish to speak and
I believe we're ready for any
info.
Is there any is there any quite
further questions of the
committee.
Right is there any objection to
do pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy five point two
version with the amendment.
All right.
you have would you pass Center
Sedillo Lopez thank you.
Committee members last matter we
have a Senate bill three seventy
five we this last week we began
hearing a little earlier today
we suspended the hearing because
well I was told that the the
Attorney General but they're
just wish to join us and I see
he has joined us which I
appreciate you doing Attorney
General the the issue come up
really at that look at myself on
this camera
the issue come up at market my
response my question when we are
this bill on Friday there was
something that was not in there
on Friday and as we agreed to
move on the bill Friday that
appear today.
In today's version of the bill
there was a two hundred fifty
thousand dollar appropriation to
the attorney general's office
but it was just a general
appropriations your office it
was put in the Senate three
seventy five.
By a prior action of the
committee center Ivy Soto
amended the bill to restrict
that two hundred fifty thousand
dollars to be used by the trade
general's office only in
connection with the this
particular act to seventy five
that's been adopted by the
committee and and my concern in
response to even that was that
we were essentially putting two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
in December when yours is bill
but you had asked for.
Attorney General Balderas and I
I would I would I'm sure you're
going to tell me that this is a
good idea and you needed in the
in your your agency needs at the
same time I'm sure that's
probably true that point out for
everybody and every agency in
the state could use some more
money in their budget and and
just to put that money into this
bill without hearing from you or
even knowing that you know you
wanted or asked for it was a
surprise to me we have the other
reason that that you probably
got called here last minute was
because on Friday one of the
subjects that came up some to
some degree was that the
Attorney General and ensuring
does position in the law
enforcement academy academy now
the certifications where was
being eliminated mother was the
attorney general's role within a
limited.
We didn't have anybody from your
agency.
Supporting or opposing that
which kind of surprised me again
and I remember looking to take
action use user with me.
Attorney General Balderas United
together allows you know me I'm
reluctant to cut you out of the
board and agency in a process
without hearing from you
candidly and and then and then
I'm also Rick was reluctant
today to to be ask put two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
in the bill by Senator McGill's
I'm looking at the finance chair
over there right now and then he
must be awash in money but it
but it was one to put two
hundred thousand your agency
budget that we hadn't really
discussed consider heard from
you about so that's why you got
a call here and been active join
us Attorney General so let me
let me turn the committee to you
briefly if you would please just
we've had a chance to look at
this bill if not we want to give
you the time to do so and and
I'm happy to give you some
additional time to so if if you
look at it then perhaps your
thoughts recommendations to the
committee Attorney General
Balderas.
Mr chairman thank you for the
invitation and I I and I do
appreciate the the abrupt
call I would rather you all
reach out and I and we're
grateful to do I do want to
apologize a header of the time
we spent our staff rather thin
but sometimes we get
misconstrued were more
deferential to you all in your
process and try to.
Of the state state out of some
of these complex issues and so
we're really really needed and
and there's a bill that's close
to being protected if I may
Mister chairman I just I I
really get the opportunity to.
truly give credit to the
individuals have been working
with senator Munoz and with your
committee
we we're not taking a strong
position early on and be very
deferential on whether or not
the Sanchez wanted the AG's
office heavily involved in the
L. E. A. B. and we were quietly
being deferential because I I
think the the overall issue of
law enforcement accountability
and reform was a very important
topic and we were giving you all
an opportunity to try to see
where the direction was going on
please to report to you that
what we have been vocal behind
the scenes we've been staying in
close contact with Mr forty
director forty and we wrote of
Senator Ingle answer money
almost.
In in rather a specific detail
about two weeks ago that we were
supportive of the movement
toward overhauling the LDAP and
so I want to give you the credit
and and senator many Austin
center in goal I have not seen
such a more complicated topic
around law enforcement
accountability reform.
Come to such a fast opportunity
for fixing a lot of problems and
I just want to highlight the
three that I think away and that
I think the bill fixes that
we've been struggling with for
five years when it comes to
providing due process and
accountability law enforcement
officers the first is that no
one has ever tackled the
governance issue the way this
committee has and the way
senator Munoz and his group I
have they have fixed that in
this bill.
Breaking it out between
training.
And discipline I think will
serve the the safety and the
officers and the communities
very well that was not the case
before a lot of times the issues
were being mixed number two this
has always been on on funded
operation from the very
beginning the ability to
investigate officer misconduct
for five thousand officers are
more.
I used to feel bad the amount of
resources that the PS had set
aside for a thorough of adequate
investigations and that impacts
both sides innocent officers and
officers that need to be
disciplined it was to say the
least a train wreck I think that
was my quote number two and I
think that this bill is pumping
some real dollars Mr Chairman
into it and that they're they're
vastly needed.
Number three those dollars are
going to go to better
investigations the truth of the
matter is that when there was a
officer involved K. like in your
community and we've had some
high profile.
Rice's trauma situations
the investigations were not
adequate network timing and so
Senator when else and all of his
group is dumping and resources
that I have never seen in five
years that I've been Attorney
General so want to commend this
committee for considering a
structural change and then
finally I'll shut up at this
point the most compelling where
I did sneak in toward the back
was that I said that I would
hate to see all this positive
work completed the areas of
governance the area of increased
funding the areas of unfairness
in timeliness and then for us to
drop the ball that the committee
not realize that that's only
half the process once the
committee recommends discipline
for suspension then there are a
group of cases that we have
sixty two of them right now to
go to some form of litigation or
administrative prosecution and
we have forever as I have been
the need and before many before
me we have a duct taped up and
really order volunteers that
that process is never been
funded and I'm not talking about
the legal counsel that the AG's
office has generally supported
for the board advising the board
I'm talking about when an
officer does not accept the
discipline of the board there
was those cases that went to my
litigation department and those
of never been funded and
I was ecstatic to hear the
sponsor and senator sure take
this issue up and I asked for a
quarter of Mr chairman that's
about to prosecutors to be set
aside to to make sure that they
uphold the the decision of the
board and those go to
administrative prosecutions and
many times we have to win those
and those are the cases of
record as well so that's kind of
I really do think you you all
are solving.
Would have been headaches for
our office for five years in in
in work rapid time this is
really a big win for law
enforcement accountability it's
a big win for activists and I
really think this is I hope this
legislation gets a lot of
You all deserve a lot of credit
there's been prop more progress
made in the last thirty days on
this issue that I've seen in the
five year so with that we could
use district chairman the two
hundred fifty thousand we would
gladly comply with just using
those funds for law enforcement
administrative prosecutions but
as I close Mr Chairman I think
that that all the policy
training and ultimately good
decision makers that you're
putting on this board
could really be come on hinged
if we don't have prosecutors
that are set aside to
administrative and prosecute
these cases and we thought we
were pretty much a bargain.
The money you're putting into
the other areas of training and
oversight and and robust
investigations we thought that
to our fifty thousand was a was
a good way that I can throw in
or match any any other jobs and
I will say this as far as.
Me being removed from committees
and.
Yeah it didn't it didn't just
hurt my ego I really do for you
all is if you have open ideas
and you don't want the AG on
board
I will say this and this was my
my request back to this
committee.
there are good reasons that that
the AG does not want to chair
the law enforcement academy for
the first is many times I was
abstaining myself and the
secretary of public safety when
we get to the discipline portion
we would purposely abstaining
because we knew that we would be
in litigation with some of these
cases later on it seems like you
to fix that I I don't think
the elected Attorney General
should be the chair of the board
that disciplines officers
however because we're one of the
few statewide out agencies also
the prosecutor misconduct that
that does human trafficking and
some other unique investigation
statewide what we support local
law enforcement my special
agents started would be a good
idea to be on the policy side
the basically the training site
we would ask respectfully Mr
chairman if you would write us
back on to that committee we
don't think that it would be a
conflict to weigh in on policy
and then further more for the
difference of this committee and
the service centre money also
close with this
I'm okay that being a designated
position there are some very
highly qualified agents that I
would probably put on that
committee and so that would keep
me not conflicted but keep our
office in the training board
that we think we can make a
valuable contribution there's
also some touch here is that
local law enforcement generally
likes to give to us anyway like
disability issues racial
profiling you know as you know
this business is complicated so
we do think that if you would
allow us we would love to
continue to participate on the
the training side of the law
enforcement academy board and
without stand for questions Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Well there are several others
no system with us or not I don't
know I am you can get the
changes that are under current
general so you just should be
made to the bill.
I heard a mighty and the track.
We don't know where they belong
placed.
I gotta I gotta tell you the
Attorney General with those
glasses in that screen here's a
pretty groovy a fact that on the
wedding known are you gotta get
that green light here are.
Pretty good what there you go
that's what you want to do that
that's right there
we are you know the good
presentation very thorough
explanation for why you to
funding on flabbergasted to
learn and I learned for the
first time that you've got no
funding at all for prosecuting
bad cops and the why are we
surprised we have that.
Right here we go.
Yes Representative four
composition make up that should
be further amendment to your
bill.
and.
However so I want to get your
response to that get
understanding of
your willingness to do that I I
am reluctant to do that on the
Senate floor.
And we we try to make a point
tonight the bill back on again
when state with all the changes
that amendments.
Basically because we can still
hear it on Thursday but less.
The general says he recognizes
the right here and so all come
here now
I'm not sure what other option
we have.
Those scenarios that don't.
This is also.
Mr chairman and and I thank you
Attorney General and I don't
know if you sing the substitute
but we've already put him back
in that board.
So I I guess my question is as
attorney generals in the
substitute bill in the language
in the sense to.
Mister chairman Senator yeah
that's what I was raising my
hand to that that I would not
We work with Mr forty this
morning and and it's our
understanding that
we have not seen the substance
but we agreed to all of those
changes and thought they were
important compromises so I'm my
intention not to hold up the
bill I think as I was making
those comments that was my
understanding that
that those are those issues have
been addressed director forty do
you mind stating that correctly.
Mr Chairman attorney general yes
I'm Eugene was added back in on
on the board.
On one more we're there was no
conflict create created right so
Mister chairman Senator as I
understand it all those issues
are reckoned so that's why I was
giving you all so much credit I
I I wasn't flying blind I.
I was aware of the bill last
time and and the evolution and
so I'm I'm I'm serious I'm I'm
giving you all credit in the
areas of governance finance
investigations and now
litigation you all hit kind of
hit that.
Those issues very effectively
and we're supportive of the bill
I think as substituted right
now.
This.
Thank you Mr chair and Center
meanness Attorney General of all
there is you you might have
Senator speaking and I I missed
and I apologize if that's the
case but I'm also shocked to
hear that you don't have funding
to prosecute that cops was that
a request that was in your your
agency budget to the finance
committee
Mr chairman Senator Duhigg no
we've always kind of ask more of
like a a lump sum in on what's
called an unanticipated
litigation for some of the more
complex criminal prosecution
cases we're doing the show cold
case in Los crucis we're we
we've generally taken on the
criminal cases and the LFC and
house and Senate have kind of
put loan some dollars and we've
drawn down litigation
the civil.
Enforcement provision you're
referencing today has always
been on funded we've always
asked for three or four other
legislative priorities tobacco
litigation other areas that
create revenue so it this is
never made my top three
but we've always absorb it
through civil litigation in our
department as the.
What was different as before
district attorneys used to look
at law enforcement prosecutions
for calorie shootings more and
we would absorb the civil
prosecutions what I've been
sensing lately is that there is
a greater need to free up the
attorney general's office to do
officer involved shootings and
so I I saw this opportunity down
but you know what they this is a
great opportunity to fund that
LEEAP prosecution so it never
has made the top three but
in fairness we've never put
forth.
Institutionalizing those
prosecutions always always
exhort.
Thank you and Mr chair Senator
train general it.
And I I feel like if this was I
think this is funding that that
should have gone through the the
normal channels I rather than
and sticking in the spell
I would feel better about it.
Being in there if it if it had
there have been a request of the
finance committee to to include
this body I have to be part of
that lump sum but but I'm I'm
not comfortable with that
showing up here for the first
time.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Any members.
The committee
so again as I said in the.
Disappointed that you're not
have that funding Attorney
General Balderas we've got a new
finance committee in new finance
committee chair the new Senate
hope you'll find that funding I
don't I don't think that the.
Putting it into the bill this
way is is the right way we
should do it I move that we
strike the funding that was
added to the bill after Friday
the two hundred fifty thousand
are funding but the the bill
proceed without that language in
it and that the the funding be
found through the appropriations
process the finance budget
committee process
that that's the motion that I'm
making at this time second.
Sure sure with the second the
committee discussion.
Does he want to call it a
friendly friendly amendment I'm
Mr chairman I think that's
friendly at I think his nose
legislation goes through we
discover staff and we try to put
it where it belongs if you guys
don't agree that we have
received house bill two so we
can add that in house bill two
in a light which are.
Good.
And I'd be happy to support that
in that way other committee
members on the proposed
amendment.
Emily I'm not give you specific
language but will will will
simply work out a strike of the
appropriation language.
Any further discussion.
Senator Lopez.
I'm and I am hopeful
That there would be a.
An effort to make sure that
amendment does get placed into
house bill two that does fund
needed litigators.
and and you know as well as I
have Mister chairman at this is
been an issue around for a very
long time and I'm hoping that we
can fund it
and help out with that this
particular issue that does exist
it's an issue that has to be
dealt with and I know that we do
have some extra funds with the
projections in our budget at
this point.
so I just hope that the chair of
finance will see that and I'll
be glad to help also with
regards to an Amendment house
bill two is it comes over to our
chamber thank you.
Senator Lopez all all all you
don't add that up I'm cognizant
of who the sponsor of this bill
is and the fact that he may have
some influence with house bill
two when it comes over and then
also the Attorney General I
trusted Attorney General will
work the Senate finance
committee to get the budget he
needs for the personality needs
thank you Sir Lopez other
committee members any other
discussion on the proposed
amendment.
All right resetting the
amendment is to strike the
appropriation
outside of the process we follow
through Friday is there any
objection to the adoption of
that amendment.
Mixing that amendment is adopted
and we do still have a quorum
all right committee members on
the bill as amended.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I move the do not
pass on Senate bill three
seventy five and a do pass on
the Judiciary Committee
substitute for three seventy
five.
Thank you I'll second that
motion is there any objection to
the motion.
Show all members present voting
in the affirmative senator Munoz
you have a new passed so you and
your supporters thank you for
appearing before us late today
and late Friday as well to.
The other being no further
business the Senate Judiciary
Committee it will be in recess
thank you members were working
late.
