Yeah.
Ah!
Thank you, Mr Chair, and as
you're going to the table, the
committee sub
Let's check. Thank you, Madam
Chair members of committee.
We're trying to
Anticipate a lot of bills coming
to Senate judiciary, But believe
it or not, we've only got these
two bills in our committee at
this point in time, and so we're
rolling over the meeting.
Special Senate bill seventies in
the committee. It's a bill this
committee has heard repeatedly
uh and, as the committee knows,
was essentially the same bill
that went up to the governor's
desk the last two years off just
remind the committee that the
vote on this bill
Again. I'll just I'll show you a
small distinction, but the vote
on this committee last time was
7 to 1 in favor. It passed the
Senate finance 8 to 0 passed the
Senate floor 32 to 0 in the past
the house 64 to 3. So the only
difference between this bill and
the bill with regard to judicial
salaries that you've heard in
the past
Is that the bill previously had
a tie to the federal salaries as
the base for establishing state
salaries. The appropriations, Uh
Senators and others have
expressed some concern. I think
maybe the governor as well to
the tying this to a federal
Salary structure may be
delegating or authority beyond
where we want to continue to
maintain some control. And so
this building has a committee
substitute is the same bill that
passed with very almost
unanimous numbers. Last time
exhibit takes out that federal I
and simply establishes the chief
justice's salary and then works
down from that throughout the
Change You all may remember the
chief justice salaries said, and
then every justice below that is
determined from that salary, So
I'm sure with that I'll stand
for questions and I don't think
we had any one side.
Do pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee. I'm sure I move that
do pass Auto
Thank you, Madam. Sheriff
approve vote on that, Uh,
Sure, Mr Chairman.
On Page three.
First. The first was just a bit
of, you know, it's three lines
1617 Week, Madam chair and
senator. That's as you know
that's existing language, but
you're right. It's clean up that
we could probably do now and we
should so I wouldn't have any
objection to making that change.
316 strike for fiscal year 19
Madam chair, and, uh,
Mr Chairman in that same
subsection, I guess my question
is
Whether or not you would
Um
Find it prudent, since we have
discussed
In detail. What the
What the salaries A and B
I guess my question is, is
whether or not
Uh, the
Should limit itself to
Magistrates.
So we're clear.
That is, in which case the way
that we would do it.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm not
entirely clear yet on what
you're attempting to accomplish
by doing so, So, the language
right now with your prior
amendment would be that the
annual salary for all of the
judges is set by the Legislature
in the Appropriations Act. And
as I understand that you're
intending to strike all
reference to all judges and
leave that language applicable
only to Magistrates.
Well, Mr Chairman, so
But the current structure
Where we don't provide the
initial salad.
It's provided by the letter now.
Even if, he said.
Younger mechanism we have to set
Is by corporations.
I mean, there's no way for us to
set a salary.
Or to do any preparation
institution.
So the question is having
provided as well, especially on
court judges. Yeah, the only
remaining jumped
That new deed should be
exclusive to
Magistrates at that point,
because we've dealt with all the
other. Don't disagree with that.
Um, I think that again if we're
trying to eliminate language in
the statues, we can do that.
Okay, moved that. It's
References to C P. I
And whether or not we are still
doing everything because yes,
we've
Question about the C P I message
from the governor knew the the
The governor's bill does not
have us CPI adjustment at all or
a type, and that was when you're
you're asking on the governor's
message. The bill we have in
front of us is deemed partly was
deemed partly German, on the
basis of the governors met
language but in terms of what
the
Governor wants or doesn't want
to see what we've we've
disregarded the CP. I
adjustments and the federal type
the tide of the federal
Magistrates, Madam Chair. I
should be clear. I probably
spoken there previously. I think
the governor's message. I don't
have the message in front of the
governor's message may have
included the CPI language, so I
want to give credit to her for
at least representing her bill
or wishes accurately. But
Senator Worth I would consider
that to be a friendly amendment.
I think that's consistent with
what the president Pro TEM has
been discussing, and perhaps
even center.
So on the motion to strike his
three lines 17 through night. Is
that still a friendly amendment
manager? It is really I think
sanitary sodas, right? It's it's
superfluous. It doesn't do any
harm to leave it in. Doesn't do
any harm to take it out and
The committee. I think knows my
preference if we can take out
language in the statutes, even
if its existing language
unlawful
Ah!
The governor's message friendly
emotions. It is Senator Ivey
Soto
I moved do not cast a simple
seven to include the two
Amendment.
I think for for Bill votes who
want is three amendments so 22
amendments for good work?
Ah, yes, ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
You have to pass.
Hmm.
All right.
Getting used to these
microphones like all the rest of
us, too, so try and modulate
myself disturbing anyone. We, uh
as I mentioned a bit ago. I
haven't kept track, but my staff
could probably tell if you want
to know how many bills we have
come into judiciary eventually,
But they're not here yet. And so
I know this committee to be
never wanting to waste any time
or opportunity, And so
We've had some time today. We
may have a little bit of time
Friday to for some hearings, and
I'm always open to the committee
who wants to deep dive into some
issues A bit more, Um
Mine's on.
Pick it up. Well,
alright.
Well, I'll try. I'll try to do
whatever you want me to do any
event. The
This committee has never been
one to shy away from hard work
or or difficult or complex
issues. And, of course, one of
the issues that comes up
repeatedly in
And in this committee and others
is the challenges of protecting
our Children that are under C Y
f D. So I've invited today.
Uh, Mr Michael Hart, Mr. Andy
Schultz and Kelly Stout Sanchez,
who are attorneys who routinely
are involved with cases
involving
This agency and I thought it
would be useful to hear from
their perspective. We heard from
them during the interim,
although again, many of you all
are not part of that Interim
committee and so I thought it
would be useful to hear a little
bit of that update and some
information and background on
how the system works from their
perspective. So, um Mr Hurt your
first step.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Members of the committee.
Um
I'm sorry. You know these? This
one working? Yeah. There we go.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Members of the committee
and, um, just for a little bit
of
Background. I think all of us
have appeared before you and
other committees. Um
Historically because of our
Our involvement our interest in
helping, um, C y F D and also
our involvement in in the that
segment of the community, the
most vulnerable new Mexicans in
our view, Children who are
Abused and neglected and find
themselves in foster care.
Maybe it's just start a little
bit with some background. I know
I've worked with several view. I
am a lawyer in Albuquerque, My
My wild partners, Kelly Stout
Sanchez's to my right.
Um I, um I grew up in
Albuquerque went back east to
college and then came to you and
M law school in the eighties.
While I was in law school. I am.
Um my mom actually was the first
Casa in New Mexico that's quite
appointed special advocates. She
was one of the first in the
nation, actually, and, um
And I became a Casa in law
school, which is the volunteers
to help the Children's court
judges get information about
Children who are in states
custody.
Um, When I graduated from law
school, I only applied for one
job and that was with what's now
see, I f d to do, um, that work.
For the state and for Children
in custody.
Um, And since 1993 my firm I'm
in private practices. We
Have a law firm there. Um
Five lawyers are affirmed. Now
we focus a lot of our work on,
um on legal issues of Children.
It's a it's by far the the it's
When, um it's way more than half
its probably 8085 90% of the
work we do is representing
Children in all kinds of
settings and frequently those
are under state law. Federal
law. We bring claims for
Children, um against
institutions.
School districts, C Y F T other
entities that have
responsibility for caring for
Children. We also work directly
with those entities in
legislation and policy, he said
On dozens of committees have for
well since 1993 so that's
That's a lot of years and, um
and so I appreciate the
invitation. We've been here
before.
Um and we recognize that the
challenges that C Y f D has
Are
Enormous and I think everyone in
this committee and everyone in
this building knows that.
They are enormous challenges
that take a lot of focus. A lot
of it, um, dedication and a lot
of
Um, thought and professionalism.
We're here. We have filed
several lawsuits. Um and he
Schultz, who's my left, and I
have been on the same side of
many lawsuits for 40 years.
Um against C Y F d. We actually
grew up next door to each other
but took different paths and I
went to the point of side and
heat to the defense. But this
area of all the two of us have
worked together on with with my
partners, Kelly and and Julio
Romero for many years.
We're here as a resource to you,
Um, to give you information that
we think we can provide were not
subject matter. Experts. I know
there's some of them in the room
that they really have, um,
dedicated their careers to
policy, and that's not generally
what we do. We work with
entities on policy. We work with
the entities on
On on changes and when we bring
a lawsuit were very cautious and
careful to bring cases that we
think
Identify.
Especially with you FD identify.
Problems and identify specific
Um, mistakes or choices that
were made that put Children at
risk.
Um
Unfortunately, our firms
together have represented
I'd say the vast majority of
Children who have died in foster
care over the last 30 or 40
years.
Um
And each of those cases brings
to
Two brings brings forward a lot
of information about what went
wrong and where it went wrong
and how many times in the in the
history of that case things went
wrong that put that child at
greater and greater and greater
risk.
We're not here to tell I'm not
here and I know we're not here
to to to
To try to undermine any
legitimate efforts to fix the
system.
I think who you we have been
here to help support.
Change. Um, our firms are also
involved in lead counsel in the
Kevin s litigation.
Which
Which is just take another
minute.
Kevin asked, is a very different
kind of lawsuit. I think there's
a lot of misunderstanding, Kevin
asked, was actually a
collaborative effort.
Where many lawyers and child
advocates
And the point of side and the
agency's H S, D and C Y F D
together, sat down identified.
Where the changes were, what
changes needed to be put into
put in place.
To fix real problems and reform.
The system that was putting
Children at risk.
That was it was a collaborative.
I know we're all familiar with
class actions where there's a
judge who's sitting in judgment
at every six months or eight
months, Sort of.
Pounding down the the the the
parties if they don't cooperate.
That has never been Kevin s.
Kevin asked was a literally a
collaborative.
We spent days and days and days,
mediating and working through to
come up with a document and I
think anybody today or three
years ago when we started that
would ever would ever suggest
that anything in that document
It's not legitimately.
The most important things.
That have to happen for Children
to become
Wes at risk in foster care.
I don't think there's going to
be any disagreement. I think
you'll find somebody who says
that the work that has been done
to put that together.
Was not legitimate.
Or is not a path forward.
But it's a process and it's a
process where we're engaged.
We've been engaged for, um for
years in that process.
And while I can talk
specifically about, um cases and
answer questions, I think I'll
just pause now and my partner
and and Mr Schulz to address
issues that they have, Mr Chair,
senators. Thank you again for
having us. Um, I've been working
with my cart since I graduated
from, um, law school. It's been
about 15 almost 15 years now and
Have been been doing this work
with him since that time, and
we've spent
A tremendous amount of time. You
know, um, reading through Seaway
FD files talking and through
depositions of C Y F D workers
trying to understand what
happened, how we got to this
point.
And the only thing I will add on
top of what Mike has already
shared with you all today is
that
It is absolutely our goal to
Do whatever we can to get C y f
d on into into a place where
this is not happening to Mike
and I often talk that we would
love nothing more than to have
to change our area of expertise
and and and shift gears and
write wills from now on. Um, but
until that time, you know where
we want to do everything that we
can in order to
Help C y F D, um
Mr Chairman, Senators. My name
is Andrew Schulz, partner at the
Roadie law firm and in the past,
managing
Director of that firm. Our firm
primarily is noted as probably
the premier defense firm.
In the state.
We primarily do
Everything.
That isn't plaintiffs related.
Um, I've been with that firm 40
years and I am
The glaring exception to that
rule.
As Mr Hart indicated. We
I actually grew up next door to
each other.
We both went east to go to
college.
I stayed back east to go to
graduate school. I also came
back to go to the University of
New Mexico School of Law.
I had the unique opportunity
after law school to clerk at the
United States Supreme Court,
clerk for Associate Justice
Byron White.
That gave me a very, very unique
perspective on the power of the
courts.
And how it can impact civil
rights.
When I first came back to the
roadie law firm
One of my former partners
buildings and who is since
deceased.
Brought me a case and he asked
me to work on it. It involved a
13 year old girl who had
recently had her foster father's
baby.
That began my almost 35 year
experience in working on behalf
of Children.
Who are in the state's custody
in foster care who have been
severely abused or killed when
my partner unfortunately died.
Mike and I discovered that we
had been doing the same kind of
work and that we should be doing
it together.
And like Kelly just said
I would love nothing more for
the rest of my career to never
see a plaintiff's foster abuse
case again.
But the truly sad part is
That we have discovered that
No matter how many lawsuits we
file
No matter how many injured and
deceased Children we have
represented.
No matter how much money we are
able to recover to hopefully
improve their lives and the
lives of their families.
Sadly.
Those lawsuits in and of
themselves have not been able to
adjust.
The system.
We have been suing.
And so unfortunately, I don't
see an end to individual
lawsuits.
That helped to protect the
rights of Children that the
state has brought into their
custody.
But as Mike mentioned, I do see
a path.
Where the system can improve.
And that path is through the
Kevin s lawsuit.
We've been hearing for quite
some time.
That the requirements imposed by
this lawsuit are too onerous
there too time consuming, they
take too much effort.
And they should
But none of them are needless.
And it's important to keep in
mind that the settlement in that
lawsuit
Is a settlement that was a
agreed to
Not just by the lawyers on this
side of the table.
But by the secretaries of C Y F
D. N. H S D.
All of their attorneys.
All of their consultants.
They agreed that these
Necessary elements.
Could be mad and should be met.
But unfortunately that is not
yet worked out.
And we are hopeful.
That
Both departments will continue
to work with us and most
importantly, to work with the co
neutrals.
These are nationally recognized
experts who have not only worked
with us in New Mexico.
They have successfully
transformed departments in any
number of states around the
country in Michigan in Texas in
New Jersey,
It is time for the state of New
Mexico.
To listen to their leadership
and to take heed of the very,
very specific recommendations so
that they can put Kelly Mike and
I out of business.
We are very happy to answer any
questions from the chair or any
of the senators here today.
Thank you for the presentations
will come to you a minute. I I
do have a
Strong objection to your
presentation, Mr Schulz, Um,
describing the roadie law firm
as the premier offer as a model
lawyer for several years. I
think it's important to
recognize a longstanding
disagreement between which may
consider itself to be the
premier law firm of the state.
So let me put in a good word
from my good friends over at the
module firm as well as, uh and
I'm sure we're gonna get a plug
for okay. Yeah, that's right. So
we're
We're so you, you Mr Chair
stepped into it there. Mr.
Schulz. Terrible mistake, but
Surprisingly, from you don't see
me making many mistakes in your
career. But watch yourself. I
think I think it's important to
recognize you or may not have
noticed this, but I want to
recognize this as secretary
designate for being here, Miss
Cassano's Thank you very much
for being here. Um, I think that
says a lot for you to be here. I
know we're going to look at your
confirmation and your scoring
points with me by being here
today. I think that's essential
and I'll note
A couple of things before you go
to this help center. Word
doesn't mind me reflecting that
sent word that I have been
friends for very long. He met
with me a little bit before the
hearing today says, what do we
want to accomplish by this
hearing today, and it's that's
why he's our majority leaders to
ask me those questions. What do
we hope to accomplish? And we're
seeing it. I think from the
committee, which is
The Legislature is frustrated.
We hear some of my colleagues in
the media and the press and
sometimes raking the secretary
over the coals. We've been
through this before with your
predecessor, Secretary Hill.
We're here to find solutions and
and that's what I want to be
about, and I hear that's what
you want to be about. And I
appreciate your presentation
with that attitude and tone. I
think that's what this committee
wants to be. And of course,
we're frustrated because
In the 23 years I've been here
legislators get into a
groupthink approach, which is
the solution. Everything is
bills.
We come here and everybody from
the get Go begins introducing
bills. They work all your
introduced bills they spend all
their time and energy year.
Introducing and passing bills
That seems to be the solution.
And so we're frustrated when we
get here and go well, Where's
the bill to solve this? Who's
got the bill to do this? And how
do we do that? And then we will
come to Miss Cassano's and say,
Where's your Where's your bills
for? This session will say have
any bills and we'll think Well,
you're not doing anything or
you're not taking this
seriously, and I think it's
important to address that issue
that the solution.
In my experience up here in
Santa Fe is oftentimes not bills
at all. Um, but it's easy to
fall into that that way of
thinking that that, um that's my
goal of today's hearing is to
hear some of these solutions and
it would be
Irresponsible. Let's not to
recognize people with decades of
experience in prior
administrations and prior
governors and prior secretaries
who view all have experienced
with the same frustrations and
problems back then and at the
same time.
Realize that we're frustrated
when this has gone on for
decades, and we don't seem to be
really making progress. So what?
Well, I'll go to committee
members, but I do want to
recognize the secretary
designate for being here and
constructive. This also I also
like a moment apart from bills.
There's some really great things
that happen sometimes in this
job, and I'll just tell you
this. Last year we had our very
first interim meeting in
Mescalero.
Um, Secretary designee was there
Senator Ovie Soda was there and
Senator Risotto pointed out that
at that time that some of the
funds I believe that we're
Being received by the estates of
deceased parents Center. A
risotto will have to correct me
on this, but some of the some of
the funding mechanisms that
we're going to Children in the
name of the Children on behalf
of a death, parent or some other
source of revenues that those
funds were going into the agency
and I think being used for
agency general purposes, you'll
correct me if I got this right
or wrong.
But but again, funds that were
being paid in the name of
Children were going to the
agency and the agency was being
used used for those and sorry we
started a credit. Identify this
issue to us and we were all
surprised, and the secretary
designee was surprised by that,
as well. And I was elated that
when we came to our next meeting
a month later
Senator every sort of pointed
Reported to us that the
secretariat resolve the issue
and that those funds were now
being segregated and set aside
for the benefit of those
Children and their future. And
so
Great things happen when we talk
about the problem with the
dialogue and center episode of
Give appropriate credit to
taking his call, working this
out and getting it done in a
month so we can in a week so we
can we can do things when we
talk about him, and I think it's
important to point out when
there are successes and when
their responsiveness
But I think that happens when we
help one another. And so that's
the that's the goal of today's
hearing. So again, I appreciate
the spirit of the presentation.
So with that, said committee
members, questions and comments.
Senator do his first.
Thank you, Mr Parent.
I also want to recognize Mm
Yeah.
Well, um
Mr Chairman, Senator Doig.
Speaking really just for myself,
but also having these had had
these conversations.
Um
We don't. We're not really in a
position. I'm not in a position
to offer expert opinion about
that. There's are
There are
Reasons that make a lot of
sense. Yeah, I had some
conversations with with Senator
TCP know about it. But the
We look at the system as it is
now.
That's the world we live in.
They see what F d has excellent
policies and procedures. He has
excellent programs They have
They have very talented people.
Um, they have, um You're very
pointed out that the kind of
things that can happen on
Secretary um
Because I was in and chief
counsel.
Sakura found out about this
problem and in five days
Six days It was it was correct,
and it was front page of the
journal.
Um, we see we live in the
system that as it is, is just as
it exists, and so for me to
Two.
Project out. How would we
differ? How it would be
different? I see some challenges
We've worked at other states
that have done it And I know um
um Senator or TCP? No, we'll be
bringing that information to
you. I'm sure to look at what
what the benefits are of doing
something like that completely
restructuring.
Um And and I just
I need to learn more and I need
to know more before I tell you
Why? I think
Um, it is. It is a path forward
for the Children in New Mexico.
I just don't know enough, but
I'm committed to learning and
committed. We all are committed
to helping this body and the
Legislature sort that through.
Um, as as a as it comes
together.
It's a really long answer to
short question. Mr Chairman said
her do I sorry about that? It's
a good answer.
Mr Mr Chairman. Senator do Hig.
I agree wholeheartedly with
Mike's comments.
The biggest
Concern I have about any
structural reform.
Is not what it looks like on
paper.
Is. How does it improve the
lives of Children who were
brought into the state's
custody.
That requires
A lot of work that needs to be
done. The
Quite frankly, I think it's
independent.
Of where the department lies.
It's a question of staffing.
It's a question of adequate use
of resources.
And so, like Mike, I'm willing
to hear more.
But my bottom line concern
Is
The need for a showing of how
the lives of these Children will
improve.
And and this is my various
standards that you all agreed
upon for.
And
And we're talking about Kevin s.
and we use that as a as the
vessel with wind within which to
look at what's happening and
because of these co neutrals,
who
You know our subject matter
experts, that's that's how I
understand your question.
Some of the some of the
challenges that the department
has. And the secretary is
certainly, um identified.
Our staffing.
Just you can't do the job. If
you're
Yeah, These are complicated
cases complicated cases where
Children have have endured a
great deal of verse Itty
And, um, complicated by all
kinds of
Social factors can't do the job
If your caseload is at 150 to
200% of national standards.
I can't do the job if you don't
have good supervision.
You can't do the job if you
don't have feedback, where
decisions are
Positive. They're just baited.
their their worked out. And then
there's
Consultation and feedback, and
I'm not suggesting that anybody
at CFT it would. It would
disagree with anything I just
said.
But without the positions
filled. It's it's overwhelming
challenge, and, um, there's
that's part. One part two is
What we're taught over and over
and over from all the experts
assessment.
The world has changed since I
started working C Y F D. We have
different social problems. Now
then, then, they then we
confronted then, and that's
And their monumental and the
Ability to
Determined. Does this child need
to come into care?
What? What's assess that
situation If the child comes
into care, Where's the right
foster home? Where's the right
treatment plan? Where's how do
we work with the family to see
if the family can be reunited or
to make it 22 decision that the
child can't be reunited? And the
child has has has to find
alternative placement or
adoption.
That's hard, hard, hard work.
And, um and I don't think
The secretaries would disagree.
It's hard work, and it has to be
supported by professionals who
have
The skills and the training.
And one of the one of the real
challenges that the department
has had isn't filling those
positions and filling them with
people who will stay.
People who will
Um, will provide their
expertise, not just for a couple
of months and then move on to
it. EMC two managed care
Corporation or private hospital
two or some other entity but
will stay at the department and
the department can have that
expertise.
Cary Ford and and improve the
overall picture, so that's two
things. The third is foster
homes.
System cannot work unless you
have good, safe foster homes,
and this in the department has
had a you know very different.
It's been a huge struggle to to
recruit and retain foster
parents.
I'm not assessing blame. I'm not
saying it's because they don't
care because they know they
don't think foster homes her her
are necessary. But it is
something you can't do. You
can't protect Children unless
you have substitute placements
that are safe and wholesome. We
have people that are trained
Children come into care.
They've been abused and
neglected by definition.
So they had that placement has
to have the skills to handle
that child. Whether it's a
Eight months old or, you know,
16 year old and those are three
areas at least that I think are
you know Paramount for this for
the Legislature, but I know
they're they're absolute.
Um, priorities for the secretary
as well. I'm sure
I'm just curious if the cabinets
has not Mr Chairman, Senator
worth, um
I am so reluctant to speak for
the co neutrals.
Are
I guess what I can report from
what we have heard.
Is that perhaps the biggest
difference in the other states?
These two people have worked in
And New Mexico.
Yes.
The degree of buy in
That they have received.
The car neutrals have made
multiple trips to New Mexico.
They have traveled throughout
the state.
They have gone to multiple
offices.
They have talked to
People from the highest level
down to the lowest level in each
of these offices.
Trying to get an assessment of
how things are going.
And I think each of their well
The very
Framework for the Kevin s
settlement.
They helped broker
Very is a separate settlement.
Which is called the cap the
Corrective Action plan.
Which was mediated.
Either can neutrals.
To help the state.
Get back on course.
Towards meeting many of the
goals set out in the Kevin s
settlement.
And I think
If you were to talk to the co
neutrals.
I think what you would hear is
They simply have never
experienced the degree of
Well, the lack of buying
From the top levels of
leadership.
To help make these adjustments
change.
Like Mr Hart. I am in no way
ascribing fault.
To either of the secretaries who
are here today.
I'm not ascribing fault, too.
Either of this two former
secretaries that we have worked
with from the time Kevin asks,
was filed.
Through today.
It's not a blame question.
It's a question of imposing a
greater level of accountability.
So that all of these reforms
That the departments already
have agreed to.
That the departments already
have agreed.
Need to be made.
And just just to be very clear.
These are these are not
settlement reforms that require
C y f d to paint every office
wall Light blue.
These are reforms touching on
each and every one of the items
that Mike just talked about the
number of foster parents
caseloads for professionals, um,
placements.
In
Foster homes who are adequately
trained to care for Children.
Bringing Children from out of
state back to New Mexico.
These are all things that the
state in its policies and
procedures already is aware of.
The best practices already
impose.
And as I said earlier.
The complaint that all of these
things are hard and take time.
We do not disagree, but that in
no way shape or form means they
should not and
Must be done.
This is what makes a department
Charged with the care.
And protection of Children in
the state's custody.
Unnecessary and vibrant
department.
Uh, Mr Chair as you said this
At
And and it shows
Create another oversight panel.
We settled.
And so this is the struggle. I
really appreciate Mr Best
solution to this and sometimes
here trying to come up with some
furs by imposing a
That's quite a
Litigation. Yes.
M B
Mr. Chair, Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you for the question.
Can you hear me? Okay.
Okay, Um
Honestly in terms of changing
the conduct in response to the
litigation that we are moving
forward. It does not seem to be
working well.
But
We see that a possible reason
for that is
Is because there is there seems
to be a disconnect between
The cases that are litigated.
Where, um
We learn about what happened.
We've go through all of the
facts. The experts review
everything. Um and we've figured
out why this child died or why
this child was placed in a home
with with bad foster parents.
Um
And
And with the actual
People who are working on these
cases at Seaway F. D, who are
investigators who are who
continued to work there? Who are
the supervisors?
Because its risk management
The risk management division
that retains the counsel to
defend these this litigation.
Um, and so there's not. What we
have noticed is
There's not
As much involvement. Um and I
would say that might be a little
different, given some recent
recent conversations with, um
particularly with, um
Uh, Mr Curry, the general
counsel there at C Y f D. But
It's not as much involvement in
What? What we have learned went
wrong and coming back to C Y f D
and to these workers to to
review that to assess it to to
talk about it again.
Um, and that's where we see.
Is an issue here. In
fact,
Exactly exactly.
Mr Chairman, Senator, I think
Um
Um, my partner Kelly has put But
if, uh
And the picture quite well, but
And and and recently this
Secretary Cassano's and Mr Cora
have changed that, to some
extent they have reached out
directly and
Um, and have been much more
directly connected to issues.
catastrophes that have happened
in the department. So but in
general, I think, um, we see is
You bring a lawsuit against the
state state risk management
hires the lawyers.
Those lawyers defend the case.
Uh um, You go through Discovery
experts, countless
You know, um, motions practice.
Some of these Children's files
are 5 6 7 ft in depth and just
paper.
Because of their history that
they have.
We become really familiar,
intimately familiar with
everything in that file, and so
do lawyers. The risk management
lawyers who are defending Fdn
this specific UFT people, so the
folks in that county, the county
office manager, Fred, for
example, just the actual, um pp
w, the permanency worker.
Case goes to mediation, It
settles
This is just one observation. We
have settles.
We don't know what happens next.
Because it appears that all the
institutional knowledge all that
information about what happened
is put in a box and goes to the
lawyers storage shed.
We don't see And and and we have
some, We have some
Very objective.
Information to show that there's
no as you said Luke Luke back,
There's no meeting afterwards at
the department, where everyone
gets together and says, okay.
We're getting a presentation
from our defense words. We're
going to get presentation from
plaintiff's expert
Our expert who said you did this
wrong? You did this wrong. You
did this wrong. We're going to
learn from this.
Catastrophe.
And we're gonna use it, you
know to make to make changes.
It's just not. It doesn't work
that way construct, But just let
people know that
The response that words
Don't work for the department.
Mr Chairman, Senator disorder
That's correct. There they are
Not. In fact, we don't have
except for Mr Coren recently. We
keep bringing her up because
she's changed That and the
secretary of change some of
that.
Historically, we don't ever even
meet with the UFT lawyer. We
don't even know any of the Sioux
FD lawyers are
telling US forces
Of course, the only official
But where she eats,
too,
But it's just it. Just it is a
strategy. I don't know if it's
different for corrections or
Highway department or I don't
know how they do it, but it
would seem like this incredibly
detailed information that has
developed through experts and
depositions and all kinds of
emotions Practice.
Is maybe one of the one. Maybe
one of things we speculate is
what Mr Schulz was talking about
that
Gosh, didn't we? Didn't we see
the same thing happened and
And Chavez County six years ago.
Didn't we see the same thing up
in Taus? Just 18 months ago? How
can that be?
Anyway, I'm I'm not Mr Chairman.
Senator. I'm not sure that
And you're dealing with lawyers
on the other side, Disconnected
Lawyer institutional
Structural state.
You have witnesses were not part
of the leadership structure.
And and unless leadership of the
department
What we're
Until
The last question a year.
There's there's been no
There's been enough
With the leadership of the
apartment in terms of what's
happening with this litigation.
In order or two.
Or understand what things
And begin to make some changes
because of the structural
disconnect. Yeah. Mr Chairman,
Senator Ivey Soto. Everything
you say I am agreeing with their
There's one other component.
When
Mike and I
Began doing cases together.
Risk management was far more
Compartmentalized in its
selection of defense counsel.
We would deal with the same
lawyers over and over again.
These are lawyers who
New C Y F D understood policies
understood procedures.
Understood how litigation
worked, Um, and were very, very
adept at
Being the point person between
risk management and C Y F D as
time has gone on.
Risk management has a far
Bigger stable of defense
attorneys.
We don't necessarily see the
same lawyers in two cases.
And I say that from when I first
began at the roadie firm, we
were the state's primary outside
risk management lawyers. We were
still defending prison riot
cases.
That was what we did.
Risk management had other
lawyers who did other things,
but when it came to prison riot
That was the roadie law firm.
We don't even see the same risk
management defense lawyers from
case to case which just
aggravates the very issue that
you describe Senator
Yeah, And And this is where the
if I may, there wasn't any
secret sense because because all
of the story
Book.
And yet we have the problem.
All of you.
Prayed.
Commitment.
People.
We're working with our Children.
This problem.
So we have to ask ourselves. How
is that possible? And yet
discussing this this
It's then when we have a
situation happening in Travis
County. Then there's no less
induction.
Where something where a kid
falls through the cracks
somehow, or there's a policy
that doesn't
To a fat outcome.
Somewhere.
That
That's it is capable of
repetition because nobody is
looking at how to chairman Mr
Chairman and Senator Ivey Soto,
I think
I just want to make two
comments. And then, um, I think
my partner Kelly may have a few
First of all, we don't we're
not. We're not insiders. We
don't know exactly what
communication goes back and
forth between the risk lawyers
and the department. And so while
it seems to us that there's a
there's a disconnect and and it
glaring disconnect.
Sometimes, because, frankly,
we've been working these cases
for decades, and so we know a
lot of stuff. And so somebody's
It's startling to have opposing
counsel say something that
We know would never come out of
the mouth of of policy person.
See wife D, but in any event
That's part one but, um
Maybe maybe, and were not
subject matter. Experts were not
We're not experts and how to run
an agency but perhaps one of the
one of the just fundamental
issues. Um Mr Chairman, Senator
Ivey Soto is
You can't really
Process, you can have the luxury
of time to process and and think
through. How did that happen?
Let's put together you know a
team to to digest and explore
and let's let's let's let's
bring in someone with 15 years
experience and someone else and
bring some outside when when,
when officers are operating now.
At
Some some officers are at 60 70%
vacancy.
That's what we've been told.
You mean so I'm just suggesting
that it's there might be a whole
lot better. And I know that
secretaries our consciousness,
There might be a whole whole lot
better ways to educate and, um
communicate.
But you can't do that. If people
are carrying case loads that are
I mean, we've we've heard
stories of there are
Folks working for C O F D, who
Um, have are putting in 1670
hour weeks.
Just just trying to
Just trying to do the job.
And you can't you can't. You
can't have
Uh, deliberative, thoughtful
process.
When when you are constantly
Running out of 110 miles an hour
trying to stay ahead.
Of the next catastrophe or the
next
But obviously hear all that.
Fractures products.
I'm sorry. Thank you a
difference in this climate is
that when there's a bad outcome
in terms of a settlement, or a
payment made
It's the taxpayers who William
Burden and so that the resources
And so when I when I titled the
presentation, the costs of
inaction silence. Sadly, it's
demeaning to consider these
cases in terms of dollars and
cents, but the dollars and cents
sometimes
Produces a result and when the
when the settlements are paid
from, there's not nobody's heads
roll. There's not an
accountability, whereas in the
in the private world in which I
operate with doing a doctor or a
hospital or a trucking company
There's usually a result.
From that, and that that's I
think what Senator episode was
saying is suit and suit and
settlement settlement payment
after it and nothing really
changes and because, um, state
has evidently unlimited
resources, and so if I can just
take a moment as as an aside
from where we're at right now,
Dr Garcia should be over here
and I hope you're prepared to
address that.
Dr. Garcia is an analyst with C
Y F D and I've asked her to
Right. I have this wrong wrong
already. Mr Chairman, just to
clarify I'm an analyst with the
LFC lfc. I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
Thank you, Mr Alright.
What I've asked you to come is
to at least very briefly. Give
us some perspective of what you
all are looking at at LFC in
terms of these settlements and
the cost of these cases in
dollars and cents, and I
realized this is not what is
important to you at the table.
Ignore that. So if you would,
please. So, Mr Chair members of
the Committee, um what I can
share just some high level data
about what we understand in
terms of something I'm not
hearing. I'm sorry, Could you My
apologies, Mr. Chairman, Can you
hear me now?
Everyone,
All right. Can you hear me now?
All right, Mr Chairman, Senator,
I can speak to some of the costs
that we are aware of, Um, from
Lfc s perspective, we understand
that over the last few years, um
settlements paid out of GSD for
Seaway FD claims are roughly 12
million, um, within the
executive budget request. Um,
there is a special appropriation
request for 20 million, um, to
to address legal settlements. It
is our understanding.
Uh and speaking with risk
management at the General
Services Department.
That there are currently about
seven roughly 17 million in
pending liabilities associated
with about seven cases, at least
some of those are instances in
which the department represented
themselves and did not go
through, Um risk and it is also
our understanding from from
meeting with GSD and instances
when an agency represents
themselves and does not go
through risk. Some of those
things aren't for example,
reported, Um
On the Sunshine portal, and so
we are not certain about all of
the
Uh, potential outstanding
liabilities. We're not sure
about additional liabilities
that may not yet have pending
settlements, but there is a
currently an existing executive
request for 20 million to cover
what we know of, and that
includes about 17 million and
and pending settlements.
Thank you and I again, I think
that's important Only because
it's it's getting hard to put in
these cases in terms of dollars
and sense of lives of a
childhood death of a child. But
but the state is paying
17,000,020 million continued.
taxpayers are paying for this.
So this this does thank you very
much for that data, and that
Consideration. I thought the
committee would benefit from
that as well, too. And I've had
that conversation with
ceremonials and share the
finance. When they're they're
telling me there's a special
appropriation in the agency's
budget $2 of claims. These are
things, I think, um, anyone else
in the committee before I make
one pivot.
Um, Secretary Disney, because
that was his asked to
understanding for an opportunity
to speak, and I certainly have
always this committee wanted to
do that. I don't want to catch
you by surprise and unprepared.
But I think in fairness, we're
more than happy to have you do
do it now and or please know
that I will always invite you to
come to this committee for a
hearing at a future time as I
have throughout the interim was
to hear from you like that
opportunity. Now we welcome
them.
Nice to see with 30. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I just
wanted an opportunity to kind of
respond to some of the comments
that were brought up today
because
Um, first of all, when I came on
seven months ago, you know, the
Kevin s settlement agreement had
already been signed and all of
the work that was set out before
us was laid out. I had an
opportunity to, um participate,
I think in one meeting to decide
the cat, right, but I think I
can speak both on behalf of
myself and Secretary Armijo.
Because we both are 100%
committed. I don't feel that
there are things in the cap that
are unreasonable. I think there
are things there that need to be
addressed by the agency. Um, and
so I just You know, it was a
little bit concerning to me to
hear, um, that there wasn't the
support from the leadership
because nothing could be further
from the truth.
Everything that we've done to,
um
Review. What is happening at the
department has been with those
initiatives in mind because we
agreed those are things that
need to be corrected within C Y
F D in order for the agency to
be successful and have the best
interests of the clients that we
serve our heart, So it is what
has driven me to take the job
full time.
Because I believe in the changes
that need to be made there. I
don't believe there's anything
in the cap. That's unreasonable.
Um, I think you know.
Fortunately for us, it's best
faith effort to meeting those
numbers, and I truly believe
that we're working towards that
end, you know, recruiting foster
families we've brought on 65 new
foster families since I came on
board, Um you know the hiring,
we took a brief pause to really
figure out what is needed. Um,
but we're working really hard to
get people hired up. We hired 50
in the last month.
Unfortunately, it doesn't
necessarily change our numbers
because we have people leaving
at almost equally the same rate
of what we're bringing people on
board. So it's really a matter
of looking at. What are we doing
to retain those individuals and
make sure we were giving them
the support that they need? So?
yes, there's an enormous amount
of overtime that goes into that.
There's office days that we're
still battling with. There's you
know so many other issues that
are laid out in the cap.
But I will sit here today and I
will say it in front of the
plaintiff's attorneys and in
front of you. We are committed
to meeting those and agree that
that needs to be done. So I want
to make sure that if the co
neutrals bill like there's
resistance from leadership, um I
would love to have another
opportunity to have a
conversation with them because
we're on board to make those
changes and makes 50.
One, a better place for our
employees to work but most
importantly, supporting our
families and the individuals
that we serve, so I just wanted
an opportunity to kind of clear
that up today because it was
concerning for me to hear that,
um, because I don't feel like,
um There's been any controversy
with the meetings that we've
had, and you know, we are open
and willing to make the efforts
We have, you know, an
understanding of what needs to
be done. I know there are lots
of different task force and lots
of work groups and lots of
different
Areas where they're kind of all
studying the same thing. And you
know, my ask is for us to all be
on the same page to be able to
move this forward for better
outcomes for the kids that we
serve. So thank you for giving
me the opportunity to just kind
of clear that up a little bit. I
appreciate it.
So if before you before you
leave, we're here for 22 more
days. I appreciate the fact that
you said you're willing to
discuss this with the attorneys
involved with go
Neutrals and, um, I'd love to
bring you all back.
In a week and say that you did
meet and you did talk and you
didn't see a renewed commitment
that you're describing here
today and perhaps a greater
level of confidence from those
who feel that maybe that
commitments not been there. I'd
like to. I'd like to learn that
that us coming together here for
the session is more than a
passing bills. As I said
earlier, and one of the goals
here is
I'm fond of saying this favorite
Paul Newman movie. What we have
here is a failure to
communicate, and that's why I
think these types of hearings
and these opportunities are very
useful to us is to hear both of
you the perspectives and
understand where the breakdown
maybe, and funding and maybe
people on different committees
has always been good about
reminding me back to his days
and in the
House and elsewhere that the
money drives the policy often
times and we need to know
whether the money is not being
committed and applied in the
right place and we look we look
forward to you coming back
secretary designee and weak and
saying.
We met and here's our renewed
commitment to
Cap. Great use of this
legislative session. I think
For them to actually be able to
say that they're seeing
something different happening.
Guys have been there and it
hasn't done.
We all know that
Chairman, Senator Sotto Thank
you very much, and I agree with
you. There is a lot of work to
be done, but
You know, I think we're building
really good staff. I think
they're up to decided to just
have a clear roadmap to make
sure that we're you know,
staying on path and getting that
hard work done. So thank you
guys very much for giving me an
opportunity to address you this
afternoon. Senator. I think it's
important. I think you're still
back there, Senator.
Diamond.
Still back there.
Yes, Thank you. Sorry about that
will take a while. While I
appreciate welcome you being
here today and your interest
that's useful to have you part
of the dialogue to it to you and
Yes, Senator Ivey Soto again.
The challenge for you, Secretary
designee is that you're coming
in too many of us have heard for
many, many years we're going to
reorganize. We're going to
restructure. We've got a new
plan. We've got the new team.
We've got new ideas, Heart
pointed out. The results are the
same.
So that the scrutiny the
patience is thin. Um, meet
privately when we meet in
caucus, I assure you that
patients is very, very thin, and
that's maybe unfair to you. Can
we expect I think I fully
understand. Thank you. Thank
you.
Anyone else in the committee?
Thank you for the opportunity of
