and such. Um, and then we've got
a an agenda that I think it's
gonna be relatively short,
quick, um.
Today, so we should be able to
get you all on your way home for
the weekend.
Without too much difficulty. So
first of all, Miss Phillips,
good morning, good afternoon,
sir.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
thank you very much for this
opportunity to make a brief
presentation for you, um, this
afternoon, um, my name again is
Grace Phillips. I'm the risk
management director for the New
Mexico County's self-insurance
pool, and I'm here today to talk
to you about the pool and why
it's so important that we um be
Solvent and available to our
members, um, very few
governmental entities have
commercial carriers. We have 3
counties that are getting
liability coverage from
commercial carriers, um, the
county Insurance Authority is a
self-insurance pool, and what
that means is, um.
Our members contribute taxpayer
dollars into a pool um that we
used to pay claims much like an
insurance company, but we're,
um, you know, completely funded
by taxpayer dollars. We are a
nonprofit, um, much like, um,
state risk is, um, the state
receives its, you know,
departmental coverage through um
the General Services department
and um as you know, when the
department runs out of money as
it did last summer, I think, in
the
legislature had to add $50
million to fund uh claims, the,
the taxpayers step up and do
that. And so, um, why do we
exist? Well.
In the old days, counties all
got their insurance coverage
from private carriers, but in
the mid 80s, um, commercial
carriers fled the workers'
compensation market. They, they
weren't going to provide any
workers' compensation coverage
for local governments and so the
countyur Authority was created
in New Mexico and and all really
around the country they're like
500 self insurance pools um in
the United States today, um, a
couple years after addressing
workers.
time a multiline program was
created, which is like auto
property, general liability, and
then, um, you may not know, but
state risk actually used to
insure our sheriffs, um, for
many, many years, but in 1995,
um, risk.
Non-renewed every county, and so
within 60 days, um, the pool,
the law enforcement line of
coverage was created and so, so
the, the county insurance
authority exists out of
necessity, um, and it was, it
was the county engaging in
self-help. Every county today um
participates in at least one
line of coverage, um, and
although we're gonna focus on
civil rights, I think that's the
data that will be of most
interest to this committee, um,
I think I, I really want you to
keep in mind that when
we're talking about the solvency
of the pool and what the pool
does, um, it includes things
like property coverage, if
there's, you know, a fire or
hail damage or um cars need to
be replaced or employees get
hurt at work and they need
workers' compensation coverage
and whatnot. So there's the, the
pool covers all kinds of um
really vital liability exposure
for counties in addition to um
law enforcement, civil rights
claims arising out of our
sheriff's offices and detention
facilities.
ities
Um, we can't fail, you know,
there, there is no option for
not having this vital coverage
for our members, um, we can't
decide to close down because it
isn't profitable as it
frequently is not. Um, we exist
to provide long term coverage to
our members, and that's one of
the things that makes us very
different from commercial
carriers who will come and go
depending on um when, when they
can make money, um.
If I do have a handout. I don't
know if you have it, but um, I'm
not gonna be tracking it very
closely, except there's a,
there's a picture here of a
dollar bill, right? And to give
you an example of what a
conventional insurance dollar
looks like 65% for losses, 10%
for profit. And then, uh, 25%
for overhead, right? So our, our
dollar doesn't look like that.
We don't have a 10% profit. Uh,
we spend a lot more on claims
than a commercial carrier.
would our overhead costs are
much, much lower. We're in the
low teens, um, and we invest,
uh, substantially in loss
prevention. So, uh, we make, we
have training programs for newly
elected officials. Senator
O'Malley probably attended one
years ago, um, we have, um, we
have a law enforcement uh
detention, employment experts on
staff to consult with our county
attorneys. We provide
medical assistance, our board
last year invested 1.3 million
in Lexapol to help our sheriffs
all get um, you know, current
and correct best practice SOPs
in place, and it also has a
mechanism for continually
updating that and making those
those policies available to
every deputy on their their
phones, um, we created an
administer uh accreditation
programs for sheriffs and for
detention.
Um, there is just a, a
tremendous amount of resource
that our board has devoted to
preventing claims from happening
in the first place, um, and what
you'll see on the data is we're
actually um experiencing
something of a decline in the
number of claims we're getting,
particularly out of our
detention facilities, but the
cost of those claims is
skyrocketing, and that's really
um what keeps me up at night.
Um, the, there's a graph in
here, the first one will show
you.
Um
Well
I'm skipping over my stuff that
in terms of Civil Rights Act
claims, which was what I what I
was asked to to provide some
data around um the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act went into
effect in June of 2021, so it's
not a long, it's not an old law,
it's um a newish law, and you
know, the question that was
asked of me is what what is
happening with respect to um to
that exposure. Well, we have
received over, um, well, over
450 civil rights Act.
names in the last 3.5 years
during that same time, um, fewer
than 200 federal federal Civil
Rights Act claims, and I'll
explain to you, I think a little
bit about why that is in terms
of cost, um, the total that's
been paid has been over 27
million, um, incurred is over 65
million and what's the
difference? Well, incurred is
what we think we still haven't
paid yet, but we're gonna pay,
um, but just hasn't gone out the
door yet. The
on our net position is at the
bottom of that page and it's,
it's very, very concerning. Um,
we were running close to a 60
million net position, um, at the
time, uh, you know, at the early
2020s, um, and as of the end of
December were below 30 million
in that.
That is notwithstanding the fact
that we have had some very
significant increase in
contributions and in 2024, the
pool began, um, having members
make what are called capital
adequacy contributions, that is
literally money that are our
county members are paying to
bolster that net position and
the amount that we have targeted
over 3 years is an additional
44.
14 million, an additional 14
million over and above their um
premium contributions.
If you look at the top of page
4, I think you can see why we're
having the financial crisis that
we are, that is the total
incurred for law enforcement
claims since the beginning of
the the pool, um, the orange
part of the line is detention
and the, the blue part is
sheriffs, so there were many
years when detention claims
exceeded sheriff claims, but um
that's changing actually in
recent years, um.
You can see the upward trend,
and what I can tell you about
22, 23, and 24, is those lines
are going to go up. Those are
not developed claims. We may
have just received a tort
notice. There may be 3 years to
to file a claim, um, the
complaints may not have been
filed yet, not developed at all.
So this is in terms of dollar
figures, um,
It is a sharp escalation and
what the pool is absorbing.
Uh, the next two charts.
Show year by year, sheriffs and
detention, both the frequency of
the claims and the value, you
know, the incurred amounts, um,
the sheriffs fairly flat, a
little bit of a decline over the
years, but if you look at the um
detention graph where we've
invested a tremendous amount of
loss prevention efforts, um,
there really is, I'm, I'm happy
to say a um what looks like a
persistent reduction in the
number of claims we're getting.
The cost of those claims again
is what's going up.
Um
So
The
The market and it's because
those claims are going up so
much that the market has really
dissolved. We used to, um,
contract with private carriers
to get reinsurance. So, so we're
a pool, we spend a certain
amount of money just out of
pocket on claims, but over our
$2 million self-insured
retention, we had historically
partnered with a reinsurance
company that would, that would
provide, we would like basically
have a policy with them that
would pay the coverage amounts
over that, but
Before the Civil Rights Act went
into effect, our Class A
counties had 10 million in
coverage, meaning if something
bad happened, if there was a bad
shooting or a bad pursuit or
somebody died in the jail, that
claimed there was $10 million
available to address that claim.
Um, today, that amount is 5
million. We have never found a
commercial carrier that is
willing to provide any coverage
for state civil rights claims.
It's not a book of business they
want to have.
The only reason we are able to
provide coverage, um, beyond our
self-insured retention is
because, um, a couple of years
ago, the self insurance pool
created a captive.
Uh
Company in the state of Utah.
It's called New Mexico County,
and that is our reinsurance
company. It's a, it's a baby
reinsurance company. It doesn't
have that much money yet, but
that is the only way we are able
to, um, partner with um anybody
in the commercial industry and
to provide um additional
coverage for our members, but
today, the most any county has,
including our largest counties,
is 5 million in coverage. Some
counties have 4.
And for some jail claims, the,
the maximum amount is, is 2
million.
Um
This is not just a civil rights
Act problem. I want to be very
clear about that, even though
there have been some dramatic
changes in the last 3.5 years,
and we have seen an incredible
increase in cost, um, there's
social inflation is real. We
have, um, nationally seen many
um very large um nuclear
verdicts and nuclear verdict is
defined as a jury verdict of
over $10 million.
There's actually a num there's a
number for something even more
than that now, but I can't
remember what it is, but um the
the rise in very large jury
verdicts is is a national trend.
I, I serve on the litigation
committee of the county
reinsurance Limited, which is a
a a pool of pools that that um
that covers multiple state
insurance pools, and so I've,
I've seen the trends just
sitting on that committee, but
New Mexico is really leading the
pack, um, and I'm not just
talking about government cases.
I
Talking about just your
different kinds of lawsuits
against private entities, but
looking just at last year.
Three jury verdicts alone added
up to a billion dollars in the
state of New Mexico. We had 2
that were over 400 million,
another that was over a couple
100 million, um, so we're in
some ways ahead of the trend,
but experiencing these very,
very large, um, these very, very
large damage awards and I think
it's important to recognize that
this is not about individual
accountability. I mean,
sometimes that's the messaging
it frequently is, um, you know,
deputy sewing.
And so did this or some doctor
did that, um, but when it comes
to government, um, the policy of
the state and the law of the
state is that the individual bad
actor.
Doesn't pay for their legal
defense and doesn't pay for the
damages. It is purely the
responsibility of the
governmental entity to do that,
and I understand the reasons
why, but I think that's very
important when you get to, um,
the question of caps. And so
this is, this is my hopefully
beginning of a conversation with
you about um the very difficult
challenge you all have for
determining, you know, how much.
How much should be set aside to
pay for individuals who have
been hurt legitimately hurt, and
that does happen, and how much
should be uh maintained to
provide services for everybody,
because we're becoming
dangerously close, we have
finite dollars and we're getting
dangerously close to the time
where um
The ability to provide services
and um improve services in a
proper way, um, is, is becoming
untenable this year.
Um
Well, and so what happens if
there's a judgment or something
that the pool doesn't cover and
the county can't pay, um, the
from a county perspective, we
are authorized to um increase
property taxes. So that's,
that's one way to do it. Um,
you, there's also been
suggestions and settlement
conferences that the county cell
county property, or the county
cut services and whatnot. This
year for the first time, we were
unable to settle a law
enforcement claim within the
coverage limits. Um, it was a
serious
Claim, it's a bad claim, no
doubt about it, it was a, you
know, it was tragic.
Um, but the settlement, um,
required the county to come up
with $2 million out of its own
budget.
Which is gonna have an effect on
that that county and and the
services and the and the the
citizens, um, and it may also
affect the county's ability to
avert a sim a similar tragedy,
um.
Las Cruces recently settled uh a
police shooting case for $20
million you may, you may have
read about it. Um, it sounded
like a bad case, you know, the,
the person who was shot by the
police officer was killed, um,
the
You know, it was a bad case and
in the world of nuclear
verdicts, I don't know if $20
million sounds like a lot of
money to you, but it is a lot of
money, um, and just for context,
um.
22 of our 33 counties have a
general fund budget of less than
$20 million. In fact, some of
them have a, you know, a much,
much smaller entire general
general um general fund budget.
So, um,
I know that I'm, I'm eating into
your Friday afternoon and I
really appreciate the
opportunity to speak to you and
for your attention, but I, um.
But I hope that we're starting a
conversation about what we can
um do to
Preserve the ability to
compensate people who need to be
compensated, there's no question
about that.
But to do so in a way that
allows um government to continue
to function and to continue to
provide services and continue to
um hopefully improve on, on the
work that that we are doing.
Hopefully you'll take a peek
again just to.
Hit home the um effective
coverage of effect on coverage
that these um nuclear verdicts
have had on the very end, um,
just wanted to give you a sense
of what 3 local public bodies
that don't get their coverage
through the pool have
experienced um Lee County's
deductible went from 50 to 350
to 500,000. I can tell you they
had 10 million the first year
and then 3 million after that.
San Juan's County's deductible
went from 50 to 250.
Uh, the city of Santa Fe, really
remarkable 50 to 500 to 1.5
million. Imagine if you're
personal deductible increased at
that rate, um, and they were
canceled, they, they have been
informed by travelers that they
that this was the last year that
they would be covering them, so
it's a very serious situation,
um, and I look forward to
working with you on it. I think
it's, it's something that we
just cannot ignore.
Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thornton
Thank you, Chair. Just a very
quick question, so if you were
to come back with
recommendations in terms of
making caps on the mountain that
they could be charged. What,
what sort of cap would you be
thinking would be reasonable.
That would, that would uh meet
the needs of the public, but
also support keeping these, uh,
insurance coverages in place.
Thank you. um, thank you,
Senator, Mr. Chair. Well, when
the, when the bill was when
House Bill 4 was passed, which
is the New Mexico Civil Rights
Act, the legislature set a cap
of $2 million.
Her occurrence per claimant, um,
but the legislature put in an
automatic escalator. So as a
consumer price index goes up,
the cap goes up.
But can never go down. That,
that was put in there, um, the,
uh, today that 2 million is 2.4
in a couple months, it's gonna
go up again. Um, I would
strongly urge the legislature
to, to eliminate the escalator,
I think the legislature should
be responsible for determining
what the cap is and not
deferring to whatever happens,
um, the, there is also a
provision that says it's 2
million per claimant.
So if you have more than one
injured person, it's multiplied.
Um, we strongly believe that
that should be removed. That
isn't consistent with the way
coverage exists that our
counties have per occurrence
coverage. That's pretty
standard, um, and we cannot
afford um.
Uh, say a class action or even a
a small group of people, um,
bringing to point.
4 or 5, whatever it is, million
dollar claims arising out of one
incident. So those would be two
recommendations that I think are
very important.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
all.
I do.
Thank you share. Um, thank you,
Ms. Phillips for your
presentation.
Um, I have a couple questions.
On your page 3, you said 455
claims received.
Of those 455 that have been
received, how many of those have
actually paid out.
Um, I did not bring that data.
What I can tell you of that 77
of them were non-law
enforcement. They were general
liability claims, um.
And if I, I, I could get that
for you and give it to you, but
again, those claims probably a
lot of them have not.
Been completed because it's only
been 3.5 years, um, but we
certainly have paid out on some
the dollars that we paid out.
To date, are right below that.
The, the $27,176,000 in dollars
out the door and um the incurred
that was would be what we
anticipate paying on the claims
that we have of a little over 65
million.
Thank you and, and Mr. Chair,
Miss Phillips, as I'm listening
to your presentation.
I'm also I'm thinking.
Wow, well, we have a crisis here
of is people, uh, violating
people's civil rights. There are
these many claims and that uh
that are found valid, uh, either
that the county.
Says this is such a risk to us
because something was wrong that
we're gonna settle it or in a
court of law, have been found to
be valid um by a judge or a
jury, um, so what is happening
to ensure that the training that
needs to happen to reduce these
civil rights violations, uh, is
occurring.
Well, first, I would suggest to
you that these are not all valid
claims. Many do get dismissed,
um, and, and I can tell you even
before the Civil Rights Act was
in place, um, in federal court,
our legal bureau, about half of
the claims were found to not
state a claim as a matter of law
that were filed. So we do, we do
handle a considerable volume of
claims that um that we have to
defend and invest those
resources in, but ultimately are
determined not to be valid as a
matter of law in the civil
rights New Mexico civil rights
world, um, we probably get more
what I would call weak claims
because people don't understand
the limitations of the law. It
is becoming.
Almost any negligence claim.
Well, we'll have a a Civil
Rights Act component to it.
We've received employment
claims, which are in, in other
words, so, um.
I actually have the breakdown of
what those 455 are that I'd be
happy to share with you, but
it's a pretty long list of
different types of claims, and
Mr. Chairman. Phillips, that's
why I started out asking asking
of those 455, how many have
actually been paid off, paid out
on, because, yes, not talking
about the ones that have been
dismissed, but you're saying
this 27.9 has been paid out.
Those are for valid claims.
What's been paid out. So that's
That's what I'm asking about
the.
Where there are civil rights
violations that are valid. The
$27.9 million being paid out
for. What kind of training is
happening to make sure that that
that activity does not continue
to happen in people's civil
rights don't continue to be
violated.
We have developed a 120 hour
mandatory training program for
our detention officers. Um, we
reached, um, and that is an
evolving program we recently
added 3 new courses, um, to
address me yeah, medication
assisted detox, um,
methamphetamine detox and
medication-assisted treatment.
So we, we are perpetually doing
that, um, in terms of, um, uh,
Crisis, um.
There's a 40 hour crisis
intervention training that we
sponsor several times a year at
no cost to our members, um, to
help the, and it's, it's a 40
hour with live actors training
on dealing with people in
crisis that is offered and by
deputies and detention officers.
Um, last year we posted, I
think, over 1800 participants in
a range of training on
Various topics, including civil
rights topics. So, um, I would
say there is a very substantial
amount of training that happens.
Um, in the world that we live in
and the value of the claims that
we're looking at.
$27 million is an incredible
amount of money, but it doesn't
represent a lot of claims.
You know, if we pay coverage
limits on a claim that could be
$5 million all by itself.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
So
I, I understand, Mr. Chair, Ms.
Phillips, that
That we have a provision in our
state law that says
And if there is, let's say there
is a a verdict against a um
Accounting law enforcement
officer.
Um, that the county can look to
the defendants, uh, to recoup.
Some of those costs. Is that
happening? To my knowledge, it's
never been successful, but yes,
it's true. There are some
caveats to that. Um, one of
course is the resources of the
defendant, but the other has to
do with settling cases, which we
often do if it's clear that
there's liability.
We settle those cases.
If we can't, if we can do so
reasonably. I mean, that, that
seems like the responsible thing
to do. It's getting harder and
hard and and so with respect to
the individual, that provision
requires the individual to
approve of the settlement.
Which in in the couple of
instances that I'm familiar with
was not something that was going
to be given. The individuals are
represented by counsel. They
know the, the risks of approving
a settlement, um, when frankly,
they don't have to. We can
settle without their approval.
So I would say that that
provision in law is there, but
it hasn't proven, um, to be
useful because of the way it's,
the way it's, um, crafted.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Miss Phillips.
I'll just say cause there was.
You were asked for, for your
opinion about, about changes and
caps and and things like that.
I think it's not not even just
specific to this, but just
overall philosophically I.
I have a problem anytime we are
looking to solve a problem off
the backs of the most vulnerable
people involved in this
situation.
I think that is problematic. So
to the extent that
As we we look at
These issues and, and we might
try to craft policy to to
address some of the problems
that you're talking about.
I think it is important that the
first folks we
We go to to solve it and and who
who would be deprived of
something that they are
otherwise entitled to, uh,
shouldn't be the most vulnerable
person involved, which in this
case, with what we're talking
about here is the person who has
had their civil rights violated.
That's it.
my
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Miss. Phillips. Just
a couple of follow-ups on that
question that that provision
that apparently has never used
the um
When you settle a case, so no
sheriff's deputy, let's just
talk sheriffs as opposed to
jails, but no sheriff deputies
had have paid any out of pocket
expenses on any of these
lawsuits, correct, correct. OK.
And, and Senator, keep in mind
that under the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act, a plaintiff is not
even allowed to name.
The sheriff's deputy or bad
actor. They're, they're not,
they're not to be a even a named
defendant in the case. So Mr.
Chairman so even on the
document, Joe Blow, you know,
civil rights victim versus the
sheriff's deputy's name is not
on the charging document or the
or the lawsuit. It's the county.
Correct, if it's a lawsuit
brought under the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act. It, it's
different.
Under Federal section 1983 and
the Tort Claims Act. Those are
differences for this lot. That's
correct. I just want to make the
point, Mr. Chairman, do, do, do.
And I'll ask this retortly does
every sheriff know that? Because
I've spoken to officers and they
They don't believe me when I
tell him what you just told the
committee, so I would just ask
and County's uh municipal
league, uh, you know, to
emphasize this to the
Rank and file that it's the
county that.
You know, it pays off these
settlements, not, not
themselves. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
and Senator Mr. Chair, um, we
have repeatedly told them that I
think there was so much
rhetoric, um, during the debate
on House Bill 4 about individual
responsibility and qualified
immunity, that it was confusing,
uh, because qualified immunity,
of course, was untouched by this
state law, but it was a very,
um, it was a refrain during the
debates, um, that it was gonna
be eviscerated, and there was
gonna be individual.
accountability and I think we've
been fighting against that
rhetoric ever since.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Ms. Phillips for your
presentation.
I'm just curious. I mean, you
talked about quote unquote
nuclear.
Verdicts. Have there been
nuclear verdicts under the Civil
Rights Act.
Chair, Senator, we have not
taken a Civil Rights Act case to
trial.
So I, I would say certainly no
from my perspective, and I
believe I would have heard about
it if it had happened with
another nuclear settlements
under the Civil Rights Act, in
your opinion?
Well, the city of Las Cruces
settled a case for $20 million.
And again,
That may not sound like a lot of
money to you, but it's an
incredible amount of money, um.
Objectively and so just to be
clear, because there is a cap
under the Civil Rights Act.
2 million with a CPI. So in that
case that's settled for 20
million.
Were there 10 different?
Folks that were injured. I'm
just, I'm trying to understand
because we're kind of mixing a
lot of things up here and, and
there is a cap, and we'll talk
in a minute about that kind of
claim it, proclaim it per
occurrence piece of this.
But I just want to, and I'm
also, it's also interesting to
me that
There's never been a case that's
been tried.
So I guess I have a question for
you, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, the
There is a lot of fear about
nuclear verdicts and and I I can
tell you a little bit more about
the Las Cruces example. I don't
know if there were, um,
additional plans other than the
individual who was killed, but
I'm quite certain, based on the
facts as I understand them, that
there would have been federal um
civil rights uh claims also, and
there is no cap for federal
civil rights claims. Um, and so
that drives a lot of this. In
fact, the, the
The $7 million settlement that
we had that, you know, exceeded
our coverage amount was driven
largely by the specter of and
and it gets a little bit
complex, but the specter of the
possibility of a federal Civil
Rights Act claim, um.
In terms of
Verdicts, um, there was a 403 or
$4 million jury verdict also in
the southern part of the state
arising out of a a school case,
uh, allegations against uh a
teacher who was alleged to have
engaged in over the close
touching of a student, um, that
was a large verdict, but, but it
wasn't under the Civil Rights
Act. I don't believe it was, it
was in federal court and um the
uh the court did reduce.
The verdict to $6 million but
again, it, it's sort of a
question of where, what do you
think is a lot of money, um, in,
in my world, $6 million for over
the clothes touching is is an
incredible amount of money. I, I
understand why the jury was
angry, but um, but juries award
very large sums but I think what
I'm trying to figure out, I
think what's important is we
need to kind of refine that
because we're talking about the
stateivil Rights Act and
The reality is this the Federal
Civil Rights Act that has no
cap.
Was, that's there, it was there
before this law.
And I just think trying to
understand.
Exactly what this particular law
and how we break that down is
what I'm trying to figure out.
And I just, when I start hearing
nuclear verdicts and huge
verdicts at trial that didn't
involve this act. It's hard to
actually synthesize down. I
mean, I get there's a much
bigger problem from your
perspective, uh,
But if that's, that was already
an existing issue with the
Federal Civil Rights Act. And
again, going back to Senator
Doick's question, I mean, it's,
it's the good one and I really
appreciate it. Let me just say,
I think the most important thing
is that because the counties
don't have the profit piece
because they've got lower
overhead. I mean, the fact that
they're being proactive.
is
Incredibly important, obviously
we, we want to avoid this
happening in the first place,
and the extent there's this much
exposure out there.
There's an issue that needs to
be.
Education can really help solve.
Thank you. Yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator, there are two slides I
didn't really talk about, one on
the bottom of page 5 and the
other on the top of page 6 that
show you the trend away from
federal Civil Rights Act claims
to state Civil Rights Act
claims, um, and, you know, those
of you who are practitioners and
I realize not everybody on this
committee is an attorney.
Probably know if all in this
area that there is a vast
difference between litigating
claims in federal court, where
there are 2 judges assigned,
each with, you know, a, a stable
of paid um uh lawyer clerks to
assist them in federal court
when a dispositive motion is
filed that says, you know, this
complaint fails to state a claim
or the undisputed facts
established that they're, you
know, there's no liability here,
um, the chances of that being um
ter ed and granted are
are much greater than they are
in our state courts where judges
Don't have a co-judge and don't
have paid lawyer staff to help
them out, and it is um
Yes, federal court has always
been, um, the place where
someone could get unlimited
damages and fees, but they had
to have a valid case in order to
do that.
So, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna let,
I'm sure you're gonna weigh on
on this, weigh in on this with
your voice or maybe you're not,
but uh, just, just one other
thing I wanna talk about, which
is the per occurrence.
Versus the proclaimant issue. I
actually in
2007.
Somewhat innocently.
Uh, introduced a bill to change
the Tort Claims Act.
Because, and I'll tell you why,
I mean, there was a sewage spill
that impacted a whole group of
folks in Santa Fe and they came
to me and they said under the
current law, it's per occurrence
and there's 100,000 bucks, and
we've got massive amounts of
Damage and we've got to now
divide 100,000 bucks between,
you know, potentially $800,000
claim. This bill didn't help
them, but their story led to a
change in the law, and we
actually changed and we raised
the amount, it was $100,000 per
occurrence, we raised it for
property damage to $200,000 for
each legally described property.
And again, I get where you're
coming from, but I also, you
know, if there's an incident
that involves multiple parties.
Whose civil rights have been
violated.
Again, it's hard for me to say
that we should just, they're
they're $2 million gets divided
by 10 folks.
Versus the situation now where
they each, it's, it's proclaim
it. And so I just have
philosophical challenge with
that and, and, because again, I
think what it comes down to is
there's a problem here.
And
It's a problem. I mean, you're
looking at it from an insurance
problem. I'm looking at it from
what in the world is going on,
that there's this level of
exposure and we need to
certainly continue to work to
educate, which is why I go full
circle, so anyway, just, just
some thoughts that I wanted to
share the, the 2007 bill, I
think I remember, uh, Senator
Doig's brother coming up to me
on, I didn't really know what I
was getting myself into, but I
got it through and it got passed
because I think everybody
realized that.
that just was wrong. And so I
worry about going to per
occurrence, but this is the
civil rights claims are
different, and I would really
need to understand, you know,
what a claim that would involve
10 different defendants in one
claim, you know, how, what that
would look like. So, just some
thoughts. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh.
The message I'm getting is this
is not sustainable. Um,
And what I'm hearing though is
that you can't really
say that it's because of this,
well, we've got two attorneys
who know this, that it's not so
much the fact that this bill was
passed, but that we have uh
We don't have a very educated, I
guess, um.
Uh, folks who are involved in
law enforcement and other things
like that. I guess my concern is
this, well,
I know we've done a lot around
education or or employees in the
jail and also, uh, uh, um, the
sheriffs, um,
At office and and all those
folks who work for that
department. I know there's been
a lot of work that's been done.
I guess the issue is
If, if that's not the issue, I
mean, if that's not the reason,
if they're saying this isn't the
reason that uh we we're in
trouble. Counties are in trouble
with, with, um,
With the insurance, then
Well, what are we gonna do? You
know, what, what can we do?
Because I can see that we have,
we have a potential crisis and,
and counties need to be insured,
and they, they can't pay this,
you know, overhead or whatever
it is, then where, where's that
money gonna come from? That's
what I'm here.
Thank you, Senator, Mr. Chair,
um.
Even a well run jail.
is going to have some bad
outcomes. I, I even if people
are doing their job, it is a
very, very, very challenging
operation.
But if you look at the trends in
terms of case value, what and
and again, I, I hope I said
this, I think I did. I'm not
laying this all at the feet of
the of the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act. It's, I'm, I was
asked to provide data about
that. It's not just that, but
claims that could have been
resolved for 400 or $50,000.05
years ago.
are now the demand is for 2
million.
The the value when we look
historically over the value of
claims, um, they do not
resemble.
The the the the recent historic
value of claims for the exact
same conduct.
And so, you know, my point is,
um,
You
You know, if if counties are
insolvent, we're not going to be
able to provide any services at
all. And um I, I do think there
is a social inflation that we
all deal with where it to me,
it's really a question of how
much, how much should be
allowed. If you want everybody
to get to have their own cap, or
maybe the cap should be a lot
smaller, um, is it, is what is
worth?
In this case, $2 million or the
escalating amount and it may
seem like it kind of crass
conversation to have, like we'd
never do this so at a cocktail
party, but I think we're at that
point.
Where you, your job is to set
that dollar amount. Recognizing
that um
We want to be able to continue
to provide services, and we want
to be able to improve those
services and those things cost
money. If you spend all your
money on compensating
individuals, you can't provide
competitive wages to attract
qualified people. You spend all
your money compensating
individuals, you can't, you
know, pay for excellent training
or upgraded equipment or, you
know, on and on and on and on,
and um
You know, we're, we're fast
reaching that point.
Even though we're seeing fewer
claims than we have in years,
particularly out of our jails.
That's.
That's right. I'm looking at
you, you're looking at me.
Anyone else?
Um, thank you for the
presentation. I, um, I was a
co-sponsor of the Civil Rights
Act with uh Representative
Egoff, who is the Speaker of the
House at the time, and
We tried to strike a good
balance, and I think one of the
things that I think's important
for me to do is at the time we
were passing that legislation,
all the parade of horrors were
descending upon us, the world
was going to come to an end by
everything we were doing at the
time, and I, as a sponsor, I
think it's important for me now,
years later to look back a
little bit and say, did I get it
right or did I get it wrong? And
was I, was I, was my judgment
accurate or not accurate was the
collective judgment of all my
colleagues who helped shape that
legislation ultimately, right?
That Civil Rights Act came in in
the face of a national outcry to
police brutality and abuse.
Um, the Floyd case we're all
very familiar with, and the fact
that under the federal law,
qualified immunity allowed a lot
of those cases to essentially be
dismissed because the burden is
so high to um meet a federal
recoverable claim, um, and, um,
most of those cases get
dismissed. You're right in
federal court.
But when we struck a nice
balance because as you pointed
out in in federal court, there
is no cap at all. Um, and in New
Mexico we put a, in my opinion,
relatively reasonable cap on, on
those, um, and your, it's
interesting cause you're seeing,
you said you're seeing a decline
in federal cases and um
Yet again, if you proceed in
federal court, uh, sky is the
limit really, in terms of what
you can do. Uh, you, you said
Miss Phillips, you said, um,
juries uhward large sums. Um,
that's, I, I hope you'll rethink
that and realize that's a
blanket statement, and you know,
in your position that that's not
always true, um, that jury
sometimes award zero.
Um, we have a jury system that I
have a great deal of confidence
in. I practice law in front of a
jury, and I've had 0, awarded by
a jury before it, um, I, I have
to trust the collective judgment
of that jury when when they do
that as much as they have to
trust the collective judgment
when I get what you would define
as a nuclear verdict, and I have
those too. Um, I don't, you said
that your nuclear verdicts are
defined as something, I don't
think there's a definition of a
nuclear verdict. The insurance
industry may use the term of
what they call a nuclear.
because it has a negative
connotation to it, right? Um,
nobody thinks anything. Nuclear
is good, so a nuclear nuclear
nuclear verdict has to be a bad
verdict, um, and I reject that.
Because I have so much
confidence and faith in, in
average citizens, uh, when they
when they reach these um when
they reach these results.
But again, I appreciate that the
uh the industry and the
insurers, and I, you, you know
this, I, I for many years did
work on the defense side of the
law. I, I represented the
insurance companies and I
represented the state risk
management.
Um, I defended the state and I,
I defended former governor
Martinez, um, in an employment
case.
And um so I've seen all of these
things. One of the questions I
did have for you is when you
look at these costs and so, do
these include when you talk
about these numbers in the
budgets and so forth. Do these
include defense costs?
Yes, they would be totally
incurred, right, and I think
that's an important point too,
because, um, I'll just tell you
when I started doing plaintiff's
work, as opposed to defense
work, there were more than a few
cases where the state would pay
many, many times the value of
the case to defend.
Um, and so I had a medical
malpractice case, for example,
where one of the parties might
have been capped. They were
capped by the medical
malpractice Act at $600,000. The
defense from spent 3 or 4 times
that defending it and then
appealing it and repeatedly
appealing it for years
afterwards, um, because the
state was paying them, uh, over
and over and over. The times the
value of the case itself.
So, the fact that some of these
numbers include defense costs, I
think, also requires
examination, right, is what are
we paying the defense firms to
defend these cases, and, and um
how much sometimes that defenses
delays reasonable settlements.
Or or eliminates the reasonable
settlements, um.
My, my, uh, my daughter
recently, um, had a very large
verdict, you know, medical
malpractice case, the doctor
refused to settle the case. The
doctor offered 0. So we, she
went to a jury.
Um, and I, I think that that's
an opportunity we have to
examine is that are we, are we
using the opportunity to settle
cases reasonably and promptly as
opposed to paying defense firms
who have an incentive
financially to keep running the
meter and.
I was on that side before. I, I
know how that works as well,
too, I think it's important to
point out. The other, the other
reason I wanted to um have the
hearing on top of the fact that
I was the sponsor of the Civil
Rights Act and to take a look
back and, and see, see how we
did with that was to point out
some of the good things, which
is was pointed out, we, we don't
sue individual law enforcement
officers under that law and that
was important because a lot of
law enforcement were saying,
well, this is going to
discourage people from going to
law enforcement or they're gonna
feel exposed to liability that
they
I think they were told they're
going to be exposed to
liability, of course, that's,
that's not true. I appreciate
the fact you're trying to to to
really disabuse that rhetoric.
I think it's also important for
us to note that that these large
numbers are um principally in
law enforcement and detentions
and corrections and this
committee is very much about
crime, uh, public safety, that's
been our, our charge, that's
what we've been very focused on,
of course, over the last couple
of years, and it's hard to not
ignore the fact that these big
claims are happening, um,
perhaps the, the, we can address
some of these claims and these,
these challenges by better law
enforcement training and this
legislature has been all about
that, or so.
called omnibus a couple of
years, but massive amounts of
money into law enforcement
training and recruitment, and we
want to have the best police
force possible, and, and I think
it's important to recognize a
lot of these claims are coming
out of, out of law enforcement.
You're familiar with the
expression past past the trash.
No, I'm actually you're not. All
right. Well, a lot of the
members of this committee are,
you can see the smiles up here,
uh, what
I'm surprised you don't pass the
trash is, is not a it's not.
Oh, yes, I, I'm familiar with
the concept, not the phrase.
Thank you, so that's the idea
that um you can have uh two APD
law officers who were involved
in corruption in DWI and then
they can get rehired at CYFD.
It's the same concept, in other
words, you have law enforcement
officers, um, and again, not to
in any way be negative to the
force as a whole, which we
value, but do, do, are we doing
a good job of making sure that
people don't just get fired or,
or in this case, allowed to
resign.
Under scandal, and then simply
get rehired by another branch of
government, and I, I wonder how
much of that, I hope you're
looking at that when you're
looking at a claims analysis.
Um, the, um,
When we're hearing this, of
course, a lot these days in the
context of medical malpractice,
and, and there, there is at
least this overlap, which is the
argument is, well, insurance
rates are going up and up and up
and up. You also have to look,
as we all do, any one of us who
has insurance at home or in our
automobiles. One of my daughters
is notoriously not a good
driver.
Um, and, and at least in our
early years, she's gotten much
better, but I think she had 3
accidents in her 1st 6 months.
Well, my, my insurance rates
went up, um, um, and so
I see people smiling all the
parents up here, um, uh, it
wasn't Alex, by the way, just,
um,
the uh
a lot of the rates and the costs
of these things are tied very
directly to claims, right? And
if you, if you have a lot of
claims, you have bad claims
history.
You're gonna see these things
increase. The, the last thing is
I think we'll probably at some
point in time be talking about
something perhaps similar to
what we've done in medical
malpractice, which is having the
state begin to uh put something
into some kind of a fund to make
either insurance available to
counties to pay these claims or
to assure that guys can do their
job of providing the necessary
services and at the same time
doing what uh Senator He was
saying, which is making sure
that we don't.
Um, have to do so by not
compensating people who, who
deserve to be compensated the,
the city of Las Cruces case you
referred to several times, or
it's important to me, this, the
city, um, actually was gonna, I
think, issue bonds to pay for
that.
And um
I don't see um Sara Macius still
in the room, Donana County once
paid a very large claim under
the um district attorney who
became governor when an
individual was forgotten in the
prison system there for a period
of years, um, and was neglected
there and we get a very large
settlement that the county had
to use hospital funds to pay
for, so I can see where counties
are gonna have to start.
Talking about selling property
and doing other things that may
not be what we want to do, and
we may have to take care of that
here in our, in our
appropriation process to make
sure that we do both, that we
settle and and pay for
legitimate claims and still make
sure counties can stay solvent,
so anyway, those are the reasons
why you all had the presentation
today. I hope you found it
interesting. It has some overlap
to all the things we're talking
about up here, and I appreciate
you, um, making the presentation
for the counties. Thank you very
much. Thank you for your time.
Uh, I see Senators Padilla on
the edge of his seat, thinking
he's gonna be the next one up,
but he's not.
Uh
you know, you know, uh, you know
the affection I have for you,
Senator, but, uh, Senator, here
on Senate Bill 191, and you'll
understand why in just a moment.
Senator 191, please.
You'll be right behind her,
Senator Padillo, right there.
And just so the committee knows,
I, I, we, we'll draft an agenda,
but oftentimes the the agenda
will be subject to change when
we begin to evaluate.
Who, who we need to get out of
the room and and why. And again,
this is an appropriation bill.
These are usually pretty quick,
so.
Center Hill 191. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, plus
she's a freshman, right? First
time.
1st, 1st time in the committee.
Um, yes, Mr. Chairman, first
time in the committee at this as
a senator.
Um, not my first time at this
table though, um, thank you very
much for, um, letting us, uh,
present this bill, a Senate Bill
191 is just simply making an
appropriation to the crime
victims reparation commission
for community-based domestic
violence programs. Um, there has
been a significant increase in
service needs in our community
and throughout our state, this
money would be used to
distribute to um community-based
domestic.
Violence programs, and I will
just say that um funding
domestic violence programs is a
critical strategy for reducing
child abuse.
And neglect. When survivors have
access to shelter, legal aid,
and counseling, they're better
able to escape dangerous
situations.
And provide a stable, safe
environment for their children.
Studies show that children who
witnessed domestic violence are
at higher risks for experiencing
abuse themselves and suffering
long-term emotional and
developmental harm.
By investing in these programs,
we not only protect survivors,
but also break the cycles of
violence.
Reducing the number of children
entering the welfare system.
This is a proactive,
cost-effective approach that
prioritizes safety, stability,
and stronger families. And with
that, Mr. Chairman, we stand for
questions. I have an expert
witness with me here today, um,
Marianne, Mary Ellen Gonzalez,
who is the chief executive
officer.
And we're both here for
questions.
Yeah.
I apologize. Thank you, sir. uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much. I
am the CEO of the New Mexico
Coalition Against Domestic
Violence, we are representing
the 32 shelter programs who
provide services exclusive
services to domestic violence
survivors statewide. Um,
currently we are asking for $10
million to go into the crime
victims reparation commission.
This would diversify our funding
between two different state
agencies, which we feel is
incredibly necessary. Um, our
agencies have not received an
increase in funding for
over 5 years, yeah, we've seen a
44.74% increase in shelter
nights being provided since 2023
and 52.67% increase in
alternative shelter nights, in
addition to over 19,000 calls,
which is a 53% increase in
crisis calls since 2020.
We've seen 19,786 um survivors
in 2023, which was a 30.74%
increase. We've seen a 75%
increase in the number of
children that our providers have
been serving. So our providers
are continuing to do the work,
um, at what I would call a
funding deficit, not receiving
funding increases over the last
5 years, um, as you all are
aware, there were voca victim
assistance cuts as I used to be
the bureau chief for the Crime
Victims reparation Commission,
so I can pull those numbers.
easily for you if you need them.
Any, any slight increase that
was received was eaten up by
that in 2022. Um, in addition to
inflation rates and the work
that our providers are doing.
Um, we know and can show
statistically that when we
provide meaningful services, we
can reduce the rates of violence
in our homes and improve the
adverse childhood experiences
that are experienced statewide
with the children that are being
served. We're at a critical
time, um, I'm sure you all are
aware of what's happening
nationally. And we are in
jeopardy.
of uh receiving uh massive
funding cuts because of the type
of work in which we do. And so,
right now, it's imperative that
we secure and lean into our
values as a state of ensuring
that those who are most
vulnerable are receiving
services, and so we ask for
these funds to be put into the
crime victims reparation
commission solvency for us.
Thank you very much, and we do
have one individual on Zoom,
Selena Bryant, of Grammy's
house. Are you beat up?
Selina Bryant.
All right, that's where
assignment, that's the extent of
our signing list. So thank you
members of the committee,
questions.
Motion for a due passed by
Senator Dewey. Any other
questions or comments?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Trujillo. Thank you
just a couple of questions, um.
You mentioned, uh,
The money goes through another
agency currently in the
Appropriations Act, where, where
does that, what is the domestic
violence money go today we have
our funding
I apologize. Thank you, uh,
Senator Mr. Chair, Senator Maas,
um, it's, it's early in the
session. I forgot. I'm
forgetting those, those uh,
those things, um, uh, Mr. uh,
Senator, so we sit within the
Children and Families
department. We have not received
a funding increase and as the
when I was the bureau chief at
the Crime victims Reparation
Commission. One of the
things that we like to ensure is
that programs diversify their
funds. Our sexual assault
funding for the state sits at
the Crime Victims Reparation
Commission, some of it also does
now sit with CYFD because of
federal funds and sits with the
Department of Health. Our
children's advocacy centers are
also diversified, so our desire
is to diversify the funding and
have funding at both agencies,
um, because that would help
expedite getting those funds out
to our providers. And to be
honest, sir, not putting all of
our eggs in one basket. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
And you, you mentioned we, you
said we and CYFD, who, who is
we? That cause that was my
understanding you, you, you
oversee a private nonprofit
organizations.
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Maz,
that is true. When I say we, I
think of the 32 nonprofit
providers, so I'm talking of.
The membership that we
represent. No thank you, and I
think you answered my last
question, Mr. Chairman, that do
we need to tweak the statute
regarding the reparations
commission.
Apparently not because the
reparations commission, as you
mentioned, does fund sexual
assault programs, the, as you
know, I was a domestic violence
prosecutor for 5 years, so it's
very, very close to this issue.
Um, we've, we've increased
penalties over time, including
2 years' probation on a one year
misdemeanor, which is unique in
statute.
And I think uh
In addition to losing your gun
rights and all kinds of other
stuff, it's, it's the.
The penalty is so severe, so to
speak, that
The victims are not cooperating
um on misdemeanor cases, the
The prosecution rate is abysmal,
it is abysmal. The state does
not prosecute successfully
misdemeanor domestic violence
cases at all. They're not even
trying.
It's sad, hopefully, you know,
so hopefully some.
Cos heels, hopefully, uh, but a
lot of them go to the felony
level, so the way we're going to
confront this crisis uh for now
is with counseling and services
to victims and victims that are
in nonviolent domestic violence
situations, noncriminal abusive
situations.
It's, it's important that they
get the counseling they need to
realize the situations they're
in.
Whether or not to get out. Thank
you, Ms. Turner.
We're on a do pass motion.
Um, my practice is usually
members to just ask if there's
any objection by a show of hands
as opposed to taking a roll call
vote. So for those of you new
members, if there's any
objection to the do pass motion,
would you indicate by your hand.
All right, seeing none, please
show all members voting in the
affirmative. Senator, you have a
do pass motion that was pretty
easy for your very first time.
It won't go quite so easy next
time.
Senator Padilla, I hope you'll
accept my apologies for bumping
you there for a moment.
I know both of you are needed
over in finance.
His finance meeting?
Oh, really?
Really? Oh.
Makes me look bad.
Having this poor committee on a
Friday afternoon.
All right.
As long as I'm making this
president happy.
All right, good.
Senator Padilla, Senate Bill
161, you probably, I assume are
familiar with the rules for the
committee and you have, um, 10
to 15 minutes for your
presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate you hearing us today.
I do have with me, um, our
adjutant general, and Major
General Miguel Aguilar and also
the uh general counsel for the
Department of Military Affairs,
Rock Ian, uh, we're here, uh,
with you before you today on
Centerville 161, which
essentially focuses on on
enhancing the safety of minors
participating in programs under
the Department of Military
Affairs, uh, the bill does
mandate comprehensive state and
national background checks for
all applicants.
uh, that they're being
interviewed,
uh or candidates or volunteers
to work with programs such as
the National Guard Youth
Challenge and Job Challenge
Academy, the governors Summer
program and other initiatives,
some of the key provisions are
that uh there are mandatory
background checks, as I
mentioned, conditional
employment based on passing
these background checks and the
and how the use of uh of the
information in the background
checks will be used, uh, some,
uh, things that this will do for
us is it will enhance safety for
miners that participate in these
programs, it'll standardize the
screening process. It'll provide
provisional hiring flexibility
to the hiring managers or
organization and then it will
focus on sensitive on how to use
this sensitive information, uh,
the candidates do need to pay
for these background checks
themselves. The cost is anywhere
from about $25 to $60 per check.
And um I'm gonna ask the general
to say a few words.
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Miguel Aguilar. I'm the
adjutant general. Uh, so I'll
add a couple more points to it.
I think there's two other
provisions within the law that
change not related to the
background. Uh, the first one is
a clarifying of the law, so a
few years ago, we passed a law
that uh that allowed me to hire
folks under state active duty to
work for uh uh in in in
emergency response to do uh
mitigation work, uh, in the, in
the statute specifically said a
general fund, um, since then,
Uh, we've, we've discovered
there's opportunities either
through other agencies like the
State Forestry Office or
Department of Transportation,
uh, or in the case of Herbert P.
Caf Canyon, a federal funds that
I might be available uh to
continue working so that we're
not tapping the general fund,
which is a pretty small amount
of money. Uh, so that just, that
just clarifies the language that
I think we're OK with, but it
says, uh, and then the other
component of it is um the um
The asking for me to have the
ability to hire a National Guard
soldiers on state active duty to
support youth programs. And so,
uh, last year we ran, we ran a
governors Summer Challenge
program, um, we use full time uh
National Guardsmen for that for
some of those, uh, for some of
that work, um, as we try to
expand that program, it, it's,
it's not a tenable job, uh, and
so we would like to have the
ability to hire.
Um, you know, soldiers on state
active duty for that 6 or 7 week
period, uh, to participate in
that program will also open the
door uh for allowing National
Guardsmen to work under state
active duty to support our youth
challenge program and uh and our
new job challenge program.
Um, and so that's, those are the
three things that are uh in.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Guillen, as I mentioned before,
is the general counsel, we'll
have him here if we need to
answer any questions that we are
having a challenge with. Thank
you.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, may testify now?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I don't
know if you heard me. I can
recognize you up to a minute and
a half.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Joan
Dickerson. I'm with the Veterans
and Military Families Caucus,
and we would like to go on
record as supporting this
legislation. Thank you very much
a minute and a half. Thank you
for your, uh, being succinct.
Now that's all we have
registered in support to join
your bill, Senator, members of
the committee with questions.
Senator Doug.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Cha, as I was looking at
this, um.
I was having flashbacks to
Uh, issues with.
Getting background checks for,
uh, cannabis applicants, because
there is this.
We and, and, and not only there
but in, in multiple areas in
recent years, um, if we don't
use like this magic language,
the FBI won't do the background
checks. And so, I know one place
in our statutes where they, it's
working where they are getting
their background checks done. So
apparently that is the magic
language, um, that deals also
with employees and volunteers.
And that's in the ECECD, um, and
their statue about background
checks. So I would recommend to
you all that.
your section one that you
basically and I gave the the
statutory reference to to
Senator Padilla, but that you
basically just copy and paste
theirs and use that as your,
your background check authority
so that you can avoid the
endless back and forth.
Actually, it's just, just 4th
because the FBI then doesn't
respond for like 2 years, um, I
think you're much more likely to
be successful in what you're
trying to do. If you, you use
that language rather than the
language you have here.
I think also the language you
have here could potentially
conflict with our criminal
offender Employment Act, uh, to
the extent that it, it applies
to uh folks who would
essentially be state employees
if, if you hired them, and so I
would just encourage you to to
look at that language. I, I
don't, I'm not gonna suggest an
amendment here today, um, but
I think you, it would be wise
for you to put that amendment on
maybe in, in finance to make
sure that you're gonna be able
to accomplish what you want to
accomplish with this. And thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you,
Senator Duhe was kind enough to
bring this to me while we're on
the floor today, and so that's
why I did invite Mr. Gueha, and
I do serve on, on Senate
Finance. I'm more than happy to
take that to that in that next
step should we succeed today.
But Mr. Guy, did you want to,
um, Senator, uh, I completely
agree if, if there was going to
be a change, we can, if we
replicate exactly what we keep
all the elements.
If I could also, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Dohe, I, I, so.
We balanced what was in that
statue.
Um, so public law 92 544 is what
governs the the FBI puts out as
a governing document for the,
um, I, I, I have, I have
fortunate, I was fortunate to
hire uh Regina Chicone uh to be
the deputy secretary at at uh uh
at the DHSEM uh who ran the
program for she and DPS were
involved in the crafting of this
bill.
Uh, both of them feel very
comfortable that the way it's
crafted today fits under uh 92 5
44, which should allow the FBI
to to to give us those
backgrounds. Some of the
languages are some of the
language is a little different,
but the, the, the elements of
what's in 92 5 44, which talks
about.
You know, uh, what specific, uh,
numbers of uh population
employees, uh, it's applied to
that you can't share the
information, all of those are.
And Mr. Chair, I thought, I
thought the exact same thing
when I was trying to draft a
provision, uh, to to get
background checks in a different
context, so.
Everything you're saying makes
total sense, it just
And what I've seen over the last
few years, then we, we come back
and we have to change it again
because it, it should work, but
it's not. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and I don't
think what you're suggesting
hurts anything at all, and
that's why I'm more than happy
to take this and amend those in
as we move forward. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I just want to
underscore what Senator Dee has
said.
Uh, Debbie said inana had to
redo the background checks for
PED someone else had to redo the
background checks for ECECD, uh,
we think we've done it right.
I'm saying this again because
we've seen both of those bills,
2 bills where they came to us at
the FBI says we don't have it
right. We're redoing our
background checks. So please
take this seriously or next
year, you'll have another.
saying we didn't do it right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, I have a quick
question, mainly just on
process. Page 6, section E. Why
is there a budget adjustment in
a, in a criminal background
check bill. Is that just, so
rather than ask for the
appropriation, you're using
other funds that might otherwise
revert or.
You're saying or other available
funds.
What what other available funds
would you then?
Earmarked for this
In general, I'm sorry, chairman
of the general and Senator of
the general respond.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Brantley,
so that was what I was talking
about earlier, um, the
The statute was intended when we
did this just to cover two or
three different uh items, and so
I think it got named Colel
backgrounds, but it's really
covers a couple other items.
But, but what this allows for is
there's no appropriation so um.
We, we are doing a notice of
loss uh for the National Guard
to assist the victims of
Herbert's Peace Caf Canyon.
Uh, in the, in the communities
with some of the work that isn't
getting done at the county
municipal level because you just
can't get enough contractors.
And so FEMA is gonna allow for
uh for the guard to continue to
do that work, uh, the statute
read that the adjutant general
could hire with funds from the
general fund.
Uh, we felt it may be important
to just clarify that language
that there may be other funds
available. Um, the other time
that we used it specific to uh
our, our youth programs is uh
CYFD was gave us some at-risk
funds to support the program
last summer, uh, so it wasn't,
it wasn't money that was
appropriate out of the general
fund, we had, we had the ability
to use that money. And so we
just want to make sure the
language was clear in law that
uh funds that are available to
the adjutant general,
and I guess
Senator Padilla, I guess, does
this bill go to finance even
though there's not an
appropriation, that would be a.
A question in that finance would
have to clarify that that's the
proper use of funds, correct?
How do you know?
There, there is no fiscal
impact, but it was actually
assigned to finance. OK, I see
that that makes sense to me. It
does. OK, thank you. I'm so
impressed by two things. First
of all, that we have Senator
Brantley now on our committee
from her background in the
finance committee, so that's
very useful, number one, and
number 2, that the majority
leader didn't let this one get
by finance committee, so sharp
eyes on both of you over there
too, so, other members of the
committee, anyone else with
questions?
Did we get a do pass motion,
Yemo yet? We do not.
So this moves for a due pass,
Sanur, um, I'll just tell you
all I, I don't require a second,
but I appreciate you doing so.
Um, there's no harm in that, but
I don't believe a second is
required. And um so I'll usually
take a motion with 11 movement
alone. Is there any objection to
the do pass motion? If so, let's
see your hands. Seeing none,
please show all affirmative,
Senator, you do pass.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Senator Stephonics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
I'm here today for 2 bills,
Senate Bill 150, which is the
judicial retirement changes and
it's related to retirement.
And it would in fact
Affect our um
Berlio County Metropolitan court
judges are appellate court
judges and the justices of the
Supreme Court. The next bill
will deal with the magistrate
judges, and with me today I have
Carl Reefstock at the
administrative office of the
courts as my expert witness, and
he's going to get into the
details. I do believe we have
um.
The general counsel from
Um, and the deputy director from
PERA to speak to how these bills
will improve the funds.
But Carl, please, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
We have these two bills today
and we we really have um
3 goals here and the first is to
improve the solvency of these
funds.
To do so. Secondly, to do so
without asking for any
appropriation.
So they're budget neutral.
And, uh, thirdly, to throw in a,
a small piece uh aimed at
recruitment and possibly
retention of a more senior
season determined. So those are
our, our objectives here.
In the um houses 151 as Senator
Stefanik says, looks at.
Um, the judge's retirement Act,
uh, excuse me, I said the wrong
number, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. 150 looks at the
judge's retirement Act.
Um, so that's the Supreme Court
justices, Court of Appeals,
judges, district court judges
and the metropolitan court
judges.
Um, those judges all have to be
at least 35 years old, um, to
take the bench and for the
appellate courts, you have to be
in practice for 10 years or
district court for 6.
Before you can become a judge.
Um, and right now that fund is
uh funded, I think about 56%, so
it's not uh wonderfully healthy
and it's trending in the wrong
direction.
Um, this proposal would take it
from being never ever solvent to
being solvent in 59 years.
Um, and to get there.
We're asking our judges to pay
more of their salary into the
fund, um, they would, uh.
Pay um
Instead of 10.5% of their
salary, they pay 14.74% of their
salary.
And the uh employer, the state
side contribution rate, um,
right now is only 15%. That's
lower than for, you know, state
employees and state general plan
3, for example. Um, so we asked
them to to equalize, um.
And uh
I mentioned uh Mr. Chair
members, a couple of small
retention.
Uh,
And recruitment efforts here.
One is sort of a fairness one,
currently, the judges retirement
Act.
Um, you don't vest in for uh
until you've been in the plan
for 8 years, um, in other state
plans, it's 5 years, uh, so we
bumped them all up at the
legislature bumped up that
vesting across the board several
years ago.
And realized that that was not a
great strategy for recruiting
employees and so that it came
back down to 5, but the judges
kind of got left off over here,
so we'd just like to kind of
even that out.
Um
And then, um, an interesting uh
feature here really aimed at.
Trying to attract sort of more
veteran attorneys, and that is
to give uh increased judges
service credit to 4% for the 1st
10 years they're on the bench,
and the idea here, Mr. Chair,
members, is if you're more
veteran attorney,
Maybe you'll come to the bench
and take, even though you all
have done a very kind things for
judges' salaries. Um, it's still
less than many attorneys are
making in private practice.
But maybe if, if we can get that
service credit for a a slice of
10 years up to 4%.
We can get those veteran
attorneys, so you're 50 years
old or 55 years old, you can
come for 10 years and walk away
at at retirement age with.
Um, a meaningful pension, you
know, it's not a full pension by
any means, cause you've only
been there 10 years. But it's
something a little bit more
meaningful.
Um
And uh and then it would go back
down to then 3.5% after after
those 10 years if you're staying
on the bench.
Um, those are our, our
proposals. I have to have. Thank
you, Senator Senator, I don't
have anyone registered to join
you or speak in support of the
bill,
from PERA.
Um, yes, we'll, we'll do that
because uh normally I'd allow
you up to 10 minutes, so you're
not close to that yet, so you
are.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, currently
that are bored.
Oh, sorry. Anna Williams, uh,
deputy director of PA, um,
apparently the power board has
not taken a position on this
bill. However, um, increased
contributions does.
It's easy enough. All right,
thank you.
anyone else? No.
Members we don't have anybody
registered in opposition, so
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So this is our new art Pepin,
yes.
Pretty young.
is the beard.
So I just wanna
Correct one thing that you said,
sore point for me, if you want
imagine.
So, the 19.24% is what we're
paying in. It's not what we're
paying into the ERP. That's
18.15. It's only there, uh.
Because of our work over the
last 4 or 5 years to get that up
closer to the 19.24. So, and I
think there's other plans in
PERA, um, that, uh,
A pay different amounts, so
anyway, you can't really say
we're moving it up to everybody
else. You're moving it up and
leaving back. The education
community, so just a little
note.
I, uh, Mr. Chair, I said
corrected when I said everybody
else, I was thinking about other
employees in the courts who are
in state general plan 3, which
uh the state share is 19.24%. I
apologize. No problem. You don't
have to apologize. You just gave
me a chance to get it off my
chest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, I'm gonna give you more
of a chance to get it off your
chest. We have new members of
the committee, can you just take
a moment to do that, maybe a
little less inside baseball
between you and.
maybe explain a little bit about
what you're talking about is
that maybe helpful? Oh, I'd be
happy to do that. Um, so we have
to retirement plans. Well,
actually, we have one plant with
a lot of different plants in it,
and then we have the educators,
uh, both of those plans, years
ago we separated them, and then
we've uh treated them
differently for many years, and
we all are unhappy about it. Um,
we've tried to make them more.
Even, um,
But then, one or the other comes
back, tries to get back what we
took away. It's happening right
now with the cola.
Uh, we first for the ERB tied
the cola, cost of living
adjustment to the solvency of
the fund. Uh, I really hated
that cause we weren't doing it
with Perra, and they originally
were at 3% a year compounding.
It's one of the reasons why
their fund is more insolvent
than the ERB fund. So we tied
the ERB to the solvency of the
fund.
10 years later we tied Perra to
the salt would see the fun. They
don't like that. They want us to
go back.
the 2%.
Uh, so there's different
multipliers, and for many years,
Teachers not only paid 3 or 4%
more out of their salary, a
lower salary than most state
employees, um, but we paid less
into that fund.
Uh, so we've, we've tried to uh
make those funds more equal, you
know, I, I, I tried in the house
multiple years to do it was
never successful only when I got
over here, I finally wrangled a
little more for the educators,
um, but you'll, you'll hear
about this. There's other bills
coming forward, uh uh para
retirees are screaming bloody
murder that their coal is not
very high, uh, ERP colas have
not been high for many years.
Uh, so, uh, uh, it's not the
last word you'll hear from me.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Stephannis,
gentlemen, the um,
You answered it during your, not
in the initial remarks, but I
missed it. You, where are the
district judges in this bill or
the next one?
Mr. Chair and says they're in
this. OK, so the next one is
simply the magistrate court, Mr.
Chairman, got you, got you.
And then, um
And then just a couple of
comments, I think, uh.
I don't know if this will play
out in actuaries, cause the, the
pool is so small, but strikes me
that judges
In the last 5, 10 years, the,
the average age of a newly
appointed judge is significantly
younger than the average age of
a newly appointed judge, say in
the 90s or.
early 2000s, um, I like the
incentive of of lowering the
Um, the vested age cause if
someone's, you know, 50 or 60,
they're like, well, why should I
do this? I'm, I wanna, I only
wanna do it for, you know, a
couple of terms or whatnot, so I
think we definitely want to uh
incentivize.
10 or 12 or 15 applicants for
every vacancy, there was a time
we're getting maybe less, you
know, 5 or 6 applicants per
vacancy with significantly less.
All the judges are doing a great
job, but it's um, you get that
20 year lawyer, uh, to, to jump
on the bench. I think that's,
that's in our interest for sure.
And then lastly, you said uh.
That you, you will become
solvent in the future. What,
what is the definition of
solvent, does that mean 100%?
What's, what's the term 100%
solvent or?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator says,
yes, that's the 100% funding
ratio. OK, great. So just a
quick comment in uh similar to
The pro tem, Mr. Chairman, the,
um, I know the chief executive
went, that was the goal with the
Patask force appears back in the
changing of the of the of the
parallels.
Um, which I got beat up for for
opposing and then like 2 or 3
years later, they're like, oh,
man, we want our cola back. Um,
this notion of a 100% solvency
is is horrible public policy.
Um, if a pension fund is in the
80% solvency, it's doing great.
It's in the 70, I think we need
to make some adjustments, but
there is absolutely no need
whatsoever for a retirement fund
in government to be 100%
solvent, that is putting money
in a mattress that only goes to
Wall Street.
And at the expense of, of
Mainstream.
And so, uh, as society changes,
and I know more workers want now
money as opposed to retirement.
Maybe a twenty-year retirement
isn't as attractive as it was
maybe for our generation, but.
Uh, this notion of 100% solvency
that the government's not gonna
go belly up.
So that should never be a goal
of any.
Statutory scheme with regards to
pension funds, but, you know,
certainly 80 is desirable, but.
To just take more money from
workers, more money from
taxpayers to go into a fund that
only goes to Wall Street.
Uh
Is, is just bad public policy. I
just had to say that in, in the
pain of the protems of concerns
as well. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just a quick comment, Mr. Chair,
and again, I think this is the
day to comment on bills you've
carried and one of the important
ones was increasing salaries,
and I really appreciated hearing
from the Chief Justice about the
increase in the pool of folks
that are applying. And so I just
think taking that combined with
what's happening here. Now I
like this is an idea that kind
of came from Justice.
it's been working on this and
the fact that this kind of.
I think we've been discussing
and some other ideas that have
come from the court and ways to,
again, make the judiciary more
attractive for retention. And so
I just, again, you kind of put
it all in a package and I'm
really, this is a, it's a big
deal.
Because it is very hard to get
judges. I have a former law
partner who's now the chief
judge in the first judicial
district who made the jump, uh,
in his early 50s and it just
doesn't happen as much anymore,
so I'm really encouraged by this
because you can't have a bench
that's just.
35 year olds who've been in the
DA's office for, you know, 8
years. It needs to be our public
defenders, not that those aren't
really important voices for
sure, but it needs to, you also
need to have those that have
kind of looked at different
areas and been in a civil arena,
so again, I really I'm gonna
certainly support this and just
wanted to give a shout out for
the salary increases cause I
think combined, this is
something where we're finally
recognizing that it's not just
the judicial branch, it's our
too, and we need to take care of
our branches. These are equal
branches of government. We don't
do a very good job of that, uh,
all the time. And so it's, it's
been nice to see as we've been
in a position to help the
courts.
Um, we've done that and this
fits right in. So, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
To, um, I want to echo a little
bit about what Cenworth and
Senator Mati said, when I became
chair of this committee just a
few years ago, this is one of
the things that I wanted to do,
which was, which was to try and
really reshape the face of the
judiciary a little bit because
we were not getting applicants
to the bench, um, and it was
understandable if you're a
public defender or district
attorney fresh out of school,
you might be earning $50,000 or
$60,000 a year, and so getting a
judicial salary of $100,000 at
the time was a huge
uh increase and a big incentive,
and so we were getting a lot of
young public defenders and
district attorneys, uh, look
into those appointments, and we
were not getting something
interesting if you look at the
two gentlemen on either side of
me, who spoke on this, they got
a lot of gray hair, um, and so,
you know, as, as we all start
getting a little older in time,
we begin to think that we're
wiser, and we think, gee, we
might make good judges uh with
all this great experience, uh,
in, in the practice of law.
Peter and I were in law school
together, so we've been doing
this.
close to 35 years.
I still look younger, then we
got the, the youngsters in the
groups that are doing and um and
others in the chamber, but, but
we do want to see senior people,
I think with that kind of life
experience on the bench as well
too, and that uh this is really
for Carl, a question for you, do
you, do you remember
statistically, um, maybe what
the chief was pointing out, and
I'll, I'll, I'll set it up for
you.
that are worse comments when
when we were in the last several
years when we had vacancies on
the bench.
In many parts of the state,
there might be 1 or 2 applicants
at most, and you'll see Carl's
nodding his head affirmatively.
And, and that's frustrating for
the the governor because the
governor has to make an
appointment from those who
apply, and those who get
screened, so you apply, you
might only get 1 or 2
applicants, and then maybe want
if you're lucky, one or two,
those might make the screening
process by our selection
process, which we have a, a
committee that meets and screens
the applicants, and the governor
might get sometimes only one
name to.
Like from, and that's gonna be
frustrating for a governor, of
course, and um and then on a
good day, she might get 2 or 3.
The, the other thing that for
the newer members, the other
thing that was always
interesting to me is when there
was a vacancy on the federal
bench here in the state of New
Mexico, you'd be crawling over
one another to get uh the
position. We might have 30, 2030
applicants for a federal
vacancy.
Uh, here in New Mexico, when we
might get again 1 or 2 for a
state position, and some of that
may be attributable to a number
of things. Federal judges don't
have to run for elections. It's
probably a big one, but one of
the big differences was federal
judges were making very
substantially more than state
judges, and so it took us 3
years to get there. Uh, there
was some opposition along the
way, but this last session, we
got that passed, signed into
law, and I heard the chief in
the latest state of the state.
suggesting that some of the
recent vacancies we're seeing
the clear inevitable result of
what we do. Is that right?
That's right, Mr. Chair. I think
uh in Albuquerque Metro court
last week, I think they had 11
apple in San Juan County
District court when not that
long ago, it was 2.
So we're having that impact and
we're really grateful for, for
you in the legislature meeting
that need.
Yeah, overnight, right? I mean,
in, in a year's time we've
increased the pool of applicants
and that increasingly pool of
applicants can include the
increase the caliber and improve
the caliber of the judges we
have the bench and and the
governor's opportunity to make
appointments. So the center
where it's point, center
manager's point. This is to do
the same thing, which is to, um,
and I hope PERA is here and
we'll support this. I know you
said they've they've not taken a
position, but I think what we
should advocate strongly that
they do so and support this idea
that it's
a little unusual, um, but we
want to be able to get people
who can can join the system of
retirement system at age, maybe
55 or or even 60 and put on 5
years or 10 years on the bench,
and feel that they're going to
see a, a financial benefit in
doing so, and the rest of us
benefit by that experience, um,
in the practice of law, so I
appreciate the sponsor and um
again, we'll get support all
along the way and get it done
this time, so.
to
Moved to pass motion for do
pass.
No second needed, but thank you
for your.
Paying attention. Uh, is there
any objection to do pass?
Right, Sing done, you've got a
do pass on 150.
151 next up.
So Mr. Chair members of the
committee were now on Senate
Bill 151, which is the
magistrate retirement. And
again, it was, it would be
considered to improve the fund
at that age, and I'll turn it to
Mr.
Coral reef.
And
Yeah.
OK, thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, uh, this bill does all
of the things I just talked
about on, on 150, except it does
not have that longevity piece uh
that that 4% for 10 years,
because, you know, the
magistrate bench.
You can become a magistrate
under current law at 18, none of
our magistrates are that young.
They're all over 30, um.
However, um,
And then they don't have to be
lawyers, right, in magistrate
court, so.
We're not as focused on that
longevity increase, but, uh,
again, taking the vesting period
from 8 down to 5 years, um.
And uh increasing the
contribution rate for the judge
and for the state.
Um
I'll certainly stand for.
Thank you very much and we don't
have anyone registered in
support, so we can go to,
there's no opposition either
registered, so we can go to,
we've been joined by a
representative. Good to see you
here too, so we can go members
of the committee, questions?
Any questions at all, Senator?
Mr. Chair at the risk of
terribly offending magistrate
judges, um, and I, I, I support
the bill,
but why, why do we still have
magistrates?
What
we've talked around the state
and there are, and we've looked
at and I've actually been in
several conversations with the
chair.
Um, about attorneys in rural
areas, we have very few
attorneys.
Um, I had just 3 judges, um,
Make uh about 1 less attractive
to lawyers, but I think, you
know, it's also the, the lower
limited jurisdiction court,
right? So, uh, misdemeanor cases
1st 1st appearance in in felony
cases and then civil cases under
$10,000.
But a lot of our, our more rural
communities simply don't have um
a lawyer base to do that. I do
want to point out, um, the
magistrates in Donana County by
statute must be attorneys, even
though they're still called
magistrate judges, I want to
clarify that.
That's all, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. Thank you.
What's the move a do pass.
There's a motion for. I just,
I'd like to expand on that just
a little bit. Yeah, when we, we
spent the last couple of years
working on increasing judicial
salaries to get people to the
district court bench for the
non-lawyers, the district court
benches, the state court that
hears trials and most all
matters. The magistrate, um, the
qualifications to be a
magistrate judge are
High school, is that right?
Yes, 18, uh, and have a high
school diploma or GED and live
in the district. There is uh
another bill where we're
promoting this year to, to at
least make a 28 year.
Um, 28th Street. Well, they get
a lot of maturity at 28, um,
the, uh,
Yeah, but the for for the for
the nonlawyers, the magistrate
judges, you all probably
familiar here, a lot of the
landlord tenant, right? and um
in a small what we used to call
small claims court. Doug is
asking why we still have them.
Um, some of us are still big
proponents of having that kind
of informality. Most of the
people that appear there are not
represented by lawyers, and the
judges are not lawyers
frequently. We've had some of
the magistrate judges here in
our legislature and it's the old
idea of the people's court, but
you can understand if the only
qualification
was a high school degree and
being pretty young, and you had,
we had a lot of people applying
for a job that pays 100 what you
say 125?
was a high school degree and
being pretty young, and you had,
we had a lot of people applying
for a job that pays 100 what you
say $1,252,127,000 plus state
benefits. So we didn't have a
dearth of applicants to
magistrate positions, and so
we've been working to kind of
decouple the magistrates
salaries because again because
there's no law degree required,
they seem to be, uh, seem to be
a reason to treat them
differently. And um some of the
measures weren't happy but
At the time, but I think they've
gotten over it, generally, and,
and we've, their salaries are
still pretty competitive to
attract good good applicants out
there, um, but, um, in any
event, I that would be useful
for some of the newer members to
know a little bit about our
history in Donana County years
ago, Andy Nunez introduced
legislation to require those
magistrates be uh attorneys.
And we did a good job there too,
of, of kind of grandfathering in
the magistrates who were there,
so those who were nonlawyers
remained on the bench and new
applicants had to be attorneys,
and now we've replaced the
magistrate court down there
with, with all the attorneys and
the court is sometimes trying to
get us to make magistrates
courts a record, right? Um, and
so there's some, some kind of
consideration about expanding
the role of magistrates.
He, uh, thank you, Senator. Um,
any other questions on the do
pass motion. Any objection?
See now, you have a best centers
before we conclude our work, um,
for the weekend, you should have
all received an invitation to a
little socialization we're going
to do Tuesday evening. I really
want to encourage all of you to
be there and join us for that.
It's a good chance the staff is
all invited you, your um
encouraged to bring a plus one,
and we'd love to get to know
your significant others as well
too. Unfortunately, Jennifer
will be out of out of town, but
she won't be there, but we like
to get to know people.
that support you and make this
possible for you at home too, so
please be there. We'll, uh,
we'll start.
Yeah. Anyway, we'll see you
Monday before then we'll, we'll
get to an agenda out to you
Monday morning, OK? Thank you.
