Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr Chairman
to 70 as amended as being passed
out right now with the
amendments.
Are 271. Excuse me. I've been
passed out with the amendments.
Uh, this is the committee sub
Uh, for the bill, Uh, and again,
This is so that when the court
receives notice that a person
pretrial release for a phone and
is arrested
Will issue an order for the
press to remain in custody. They
remain in custody until each
judge has signed any of the
persons pending previous felony
cases or another judge signed
for that purpose. Considers
modification Revocation Person's
condition Released The Supreme
Court may issue rules to
implement the provisions of the
act. I will point out that it
does not say that to hold a
hearing just simply that that
the court has to consider
Their their conditions of
release. They could do a desk
consideration. They could also
do that the person is another
jurisdiction. They get hold of
video hearing, so there's
there's a variety of options for
the court when they do the
rulemaking is how they do it.
But the point is, the person
doesn't get out until the
Until the
Modifications are considered in
case the decision is to keep the
person in.
Uh, for violating conditions of
release.
With that, Mr Chairman, be happy
to stand for questions for
clarification. We've been handed
205.3. Is that right? That is
correct. Some handwritten
changes. Are those your changes
to this proposed committee
chairman, that those are the
amendments that we adopted in
the last hearing.
So there's already been adopted
by the committee, so we'll need
a motion, senator. Steward, This
is this is where you come in for
me.
Get it.
I should learn to do the correct
motion Center O'Neill. You wanna
Mr O'Neill scolded? Yeah, I'll
make the motion to pass this
bill. I'm kidding, Mr Chairman.
Awfully I moved a do not pass on
Senate Bill 271, and they do
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 2 71.4, and we'll make
these amendments in the final
version of the committee sub
Thank you all very much.
Committee members. Do we have
anybody on the bill? We know Do
not. Why would we will also
note Mr Chairman. Welcome aboard
as a co sponsor of the bill.
Thank you very much. Alright.
Committee members. Questions,
Senator Baca.
Thank you. I just really just a
comment, you know, reading this,
uh
I'm not going to oppose it. I
don't think it's going to do a
whole lot. Um especially has a
may in the back even instead of
a shell anymore. So, um, you
know, I just wish we were doing
more. That's that's all I can
tell you with his pretrial
detention. We need a real
answers to this thing. Thank
you.
Wars. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
scenario so to with that May
that's on line five. They can do
this right now, right? They may
do this right now Chairman and
Senator Morris, they may do it
right now. They may choose not
to write rules, whether they
choose not to write rules or
not. This will still go into
effect 90 days after the session
to it with this, they may do it
without this. They that is
correct. They may write rules
that will flush this out more.
Or if not, this will be the law,
Regardless if we pass it
Thank you, Mr President. Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Anyone else?
The committee?
I do want to take slow. We're
trying to get a lot done. I do
want to slow this down. Just a
little bit. Um
The issue. Pretrial detention
has been before us In the
interim. It's been before us
several sessions. Now it's been
a
Topic of much discussion from
the now attorney general. Former
district attorney governor on
down as a priority
Our goal in this committee, I
think has always been not invade
constitutional.
Infirmities in a pre trial
detention process, including the
presumption that an individual
should be detained based on the
crime alone. This doesn't do
that. My right center Mr
Chairman, that is correct. In
other words, the proposals that
we've seen in the past and
preach all detention presume,
essentially guilt and from my
perspective that based on the
crime that you're charged with,
we're going to presume that
that's such a serious crime
They've been charged with going
to presume that you should be
held.
Effectively negating the
presumption of innocence.
Mr Chairman, That is correct to
end and the previous ones have
made that presumption based on
the crime charged
Which is not always what
ultimately ends up being
indicted. That's a good point
center. So what and what that
does, Of course, it would
encourage prosecutors to charge
or overcharge for certain
crimes simply don't require
detention for an individual who
is preserved innocent and so I'm
very confident that before this
bill, what has been presented to
us would not meet the
constitutional
Scrutiny, and I think the
Supreme Court's even said
something publicly to suggest as
much as as well. So I think this
is a much better approach of the
We heard this bill that was
tabled. Previously we had AOC
here saying that we didn't need
this bill because they were
gonna enact rules. I think it's
good that we're going to enact a
statute that assures, uh some
some greater scrutiny there, and
this committee has been really
good. With a couple of years
ago, we began asking questions
about the Arnold tool.
Well, Ah, Now everybody's
looking at the Arnold tool, and
the court has modified its
procedures on the island tool.
This committee began talking
about GPS monitoring and voila.
Court adopted rules on GPS
monitoring. So my I want to just
commend this committee and the
staff that everyone we're
changing things when it comes to
pre trial detention by simply
these these efforts like this
bill, so I appreciate you.
Bringing it back to us again.
Anyone else comments or
questions?
We have a do pass motion by
Senator O'Neill appropriate. I'm
going to give him credit for us.
It's what he meant to say. You
Of course
We have a do pass motion by
Senator O'Neill appropriate. I'm
going to give him credit for us.
It's what he meant to say. You
know, Of course,
it's not what you meant to say.
Yeah, We're on the do not pass
and do pass on the committee sub
0.4 version any more discussions
seen? None. Is there any
objection?
We have a do pass on Senator
Stewart. I'm sorry. I'm sorry,
Mr Ma'am. Objection to to 71
Committee sub
Do pass. Senator Do Pass
Chairman colleagues. Thank you
so much sinister wasno.
All others affirmative.
Minister. She's still here.
Senate 96 or
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Honorable members. This is
Senate Bill 96 dealing with our
homicide statute.
What it proposes to do is
increase the maximum possible
penalty for secondary murder.
From 15 years to 18, because
murder is the worst crime.
One can commit, and it should.
There should be no crimes.
Have us different penalty and
then also it corrects a
Because secondary murder is a
special second degree penalty.
Attempted secondary murderer
should have a special penalty as
well.
Uh, take it out of the normal
third degree tear and makes it 0
to 9 years.
This is more than reasonable
considering the penalties of
surrounding states and with
that, I'll stand for questions,
Um, registered list. We have one
One proponent.
And then one opponent present
and one assume we can take a
little bit of time with this.
Mr. Bullington, are you here?
You're recognized for up to two
minutes, sir.
Thank you. Members of the
committee. Mr Chairman. My name
is J. D Bullington and
representing the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
and we stand in strong support
of this legislation.
Thank you.
What about you? Yes, Chief Chief
Whistler.
Up to two minutes, Sir.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee Troy research Chief.
New Mexico State police. We
stand in strong support of this
bill. We think it, uh
Close with a couple of issues
that have been long standing in
the statute when it comes to
second degree murder. And so we
hope that you would support
this, uh, changed the statute
and the punishment. Thank you,
Chief.
To opponents registered Daniel
Williams.
You're recognized for two
minutes, sir.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Daniel
Williams. I'm a policy advocate
at the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Mexico, and we
stand in respectful opposition
to this bill they sell you
generally opposes increasing
penalties We believe, and the
evidence shows that that is not
an effective way of deterring
crime and also draw the
committee's attention to the
analysis from the loss of the
public defender, which points
out that this would essentially
create the same penalty scheme
for both attempted first degree
murder and attempted second
degree murder.
There's a difference in the way
we punish the commission of
those crimes, and we believe
there should also be a
difference in the way that we
punish the attempted commission
of those crimes. And so for
those reasons we do stand in
opposition and thank you for
your time. Thank you.
For being quick opponents. Also
we have registered on zoom. We
have
I am a cash
And the cash
You're on Zoom recognize you for
two minutes, man.
Thank you. Um I will say that if
one or more of my loved ones
were to be murdered tomorrow
there would not be enough years
and any perpetrators life to
make things okay?
Nonetheless, I asked you to vote
no on SP 96 because raising the
sentence for second degree
murder from 15 to 18 years is
arbitrary as there is no
evidence it would have any
effect to increase public
safety. I'm reading a
comprehensive look at sentencing
in the United States right now
that was recently published in
the evidence still says
increasing sentences is not an
effective measure for reducing
crime.
It's also highly unlikely to
function as a deterrent for this
type of trying. If enacted, we
would be putting three years of
someone's life and the lives of
their families and the line for
no demonstrable purpose except
perhaps to gain political
credibility Election year when
people are understandably
clamoring for action, but taking
action that's unlikely to have
the desired effect is just seems
wrong.
I'm also very concerned about
the cost of incarcerating
someone for three years for no
demonstrable benefits. If I'm
not mistaken, we could provide
2000 a month of housing to a
family for at least 4.5 years
for what it would cost to
incarcerate one person and a New
Mexico prison for three years,
So please vote no on this
unnecessary piece of
legislation. Thank you. Cash.
Center. My Estes response.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Honorable members, I think
I think that the penalty scheme
for the on the attempted 0 to 9
and so that should be left up to
sentencing. But certainly 0 to 3
is is is just inconsistent with
Oh,
With with other crimes.
Uh huh. And then also there.
There there comes. I think what
we've lost focus on Mr Chairman
members is the concept of
punishment.
Um, you know, nine times out of
1099 times out of 100 you deal
with
With the
With the suitable sentence and
And with expungement ban the box
and with rehabilitation and
reintegration.
There's certain things that
people do that just deserve more
punishment than not 15 years has
categorically unacceptable for
the intentional.
Murder of a human being.
Thank you.
Alright Committee members
questions Senate Bill 96.
Yes, there are wars. Thank you.
Mis Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I just want to make
sure clear on Section C on Page
two, notwithstanding,
provisions. 15 is what you were
referring to. That's currently a
three year um
For attempted murder or three
years for a third degree felony,
and then we're just changing for
attempted murder to nine years.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Morris. Yes, when? When you
Are guilty of an attempted
crime. It drops a degree.
So this drops it from Currently
it drops it from a special
penalty second agreed to a
normal penalty third degree and
it's just a big drop, so we want
to create a special penalty.
For attempted secondary murder,
which would be 0 to 9. Just want
to make sure I understand what
we were notwithstanding that is
pointing to the three years
correct, Mr Chairman, this
written kind of
Kind of weird, but it it it, it
makes it a special penalty.
third degree crime nine years as
opposed to a normal 30 penalty
crime, which is three
notwithstanding, always grabs my
attention, so I wanted to make
sure um, my question is on the
same issue there. Now that you
said it drops it from 0 to 9. Is
there a reason we didn't put a
minimum in there?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Senator.
Backup. Yeah, believe it or not
on our
On our homicide statute. Second
agree there is no minimum. So
it's it's 0 to 15. This would
raise it to 0 18.
And that would be left just left
up to sentencing. There's a
there's a movement nationally,
which hasn't really taken effect
here in New Mexico to element
eliminate all mandatory
minimums.
So I didn't feel compelled to
put a minimum.
It's all we got. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you.
When, um
When you get into criminal
justice issues when it and as
they relate to the sentencing
because it's just not an area
I've ever long time ago. So we
have a sentencing commission's
structure set up.
Have they been involved in this
process at all the sentencing
commission. And if so, what were
the input? Have you came through
that? Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Senators, haven't I have not
spoken to them recently since
the introduction of this bill?
But we're hoping to do a massive
rewrite Criminal code, which
stem from the creation of the
criminal justice subcommittee
about a decade ago.
There's been talk historically
of creating a another felony
tear to make a six year tear,
and I think the fear
historically was. If we create a
six year tear, things will move
up. Now, I think
I think non violent crimes would
be moving down, and I think that
may have been the apprehension
with regards to this statue
because everything stems
downward from the homicide
statute. I don't think this will
compel us to raise all the
penalties underneath homicide. I
think this is kind of a stand
alone.
Proposal, which has been here to
introduce numerous times has
passed the house of about two or
three times.
I appreciate the time to talk
about this, um, on the Senate
side.
My understanding is that was
Was and still is the function of
the sentencing bills like this,
where there's an increasing in
trying to make sure this fits
comports, really, with all the
other sentences that are
Attached to any other crimes and
Years past. We used to have a
pretty active role with the
sentencing commission and
looking at anything like this,
and so
Kind of surprised that maybe
they're not here today or
weighing in on this.
Because that would be
Very helpful for me the other
thing that in the past in the
past that I would do, I would
look at a bill that has an
increased sentencing that we
look at the cost in terms of an
appropriation. That was an
appropriation in the bill
because we need to recognize
that when we do and enhance
penalties. Add years to
sentencing. There is a
corresponding cost.
Associated with that.
Yeah, And I think I had run
bills before that, Uh,
That are building increases.
Penalties had to have the and so
forth. I think that's still
used. It doesn't do that. But
The earlier comment made that
Increasing just increasing years
and sentences.
Doesn't the monster believe
reduce crime? At least that's an
argument made. My question
really is. What does it cost?
The effort to in your
Your work on this bill to
determine how many people would
be captured by something like
this and what that might mean in
terms of
The additional sentence. Thank
you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Toronto. I think the cost of BOC
And I'm not discounting the
concern wouldn't kick in until
until you're 15.
Assuming they would have gotten
15 years under the current law,
and they got 18 years under this
bill.
There's a concern by the public
defender Department that
increased penalties leads to
The defendant wanting to go to
trial.
Given the risk. Most of these
secondary convictions, however,
result in plea deals down from
first degree and they're not
deals.
In a negative way. It's just so
very difficult to prove a first
degree murder.
And so a lot of these folks are
charged with an open kind of
murder.
Um, you know they go to it's
ready to go to trial on first
degree murder charge, and the
state opts to get the guaranteed
conviction of a secondary murder
rather than roll the dice. Um so
I don't think it would add two
more trials.
Like the concern and the public
defender. F I F i R.
And also, um
Because it's a closed system
with
It all kind of evens out.
And
And create and has less cases go
to trial. If, in fact the
prosecutor wants to prosecute
this particular person for
second week homicides, what kind
of evens out
On the margin, but it's
something we definitely need to
consider on our criminal
legislation. Anyone else the
committee
Right motions that are sort of
I'm sorry, Miss Sherman
was was focused initially on the
The title of the bill being
Increased attempt, attempted
murder penalty and focused on
the language, too.
But
Forgiving for for going back in
terms of language of Page three,
If it frustrate felony isn't 18
year imprisonment and second and
a second degree felony.
Resulting in the death of human
being is
Also 18 years. Why do we have
the distinction between the
first degree and second degree?
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator Risotto. So
you're correct this would this
would make secondary murder
equal to other first degree
felonies besides first degree
murder.
Um And so to me, that would be a
contradiction. You can get 18
years mandatory.
By a subsequent trafficking
cases, subsequent armed robbery
case with no physical injury,
Uh, child abuse case premised on
negligence.
Um
So there are some first degree
crimes that are hired. This
would make it equivalent to
those crimes and we need to take
a look at those crimes and see
if
If those penalties are
appropriate or
Or too high, but But as you
know, there's the there's the
homicide Statute Homicide
penalty scheme, and they
Non homicide penalty scheme, and
that's where
The second degree homicide would
would be equivalent to other be
written in our criminal code.
Right. But Mr McCoy, um sort of
masters, but if we've got first
degree
So so effectively, then a second
degree felony, resulting in the
death of him being is
effectively the same as the
first three felony, then
For sure. Mr. Uh, Mr Chairman,
Senator. Sorry, Cento. Yes, And
and so.
I think
This whole concept of first
degree secondary stem from the
homicide statutes historically.
That would probably be more
consistent to call those first
degree crime. Secondary degree.
But yeah, that that, uh
But this bill would put
secondary homicide quick, equal
to non homicide. First degree.
Okay. Thank you very much, Mr
John. Thank you. Anyone else
could he
Take motions.
Mr McConnell.
Password.
Like yourself. Never mind.
I would trouble made a motion
for a do pass in this committee.
On your way out the door.
And right off into the sunset.
Yeah.
We're on the do pass motion.
Is there any objection? Pastoral
Is there any objection password
seeing none past Mr Chairman.
Thank you members.
We got represented Ream.
Anywhere that a second
Anybody know where he's at?
Phillips. You know where it's
really coming over.
Well, that's all right. Don't
worry about it.
For the felon in possession of a
firearm. Yeah, my guess is
probably not, uh, Senator Ivey
Soto. Are you prepared to
present that Bill?
Bill three.
We don't have
Okay, lets
Grab, grab a seat there,
Senator and then you're going to
be with him anyway.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. This is ostrich
sharing committee substitute for
a minute. I'm getting word that
Represent rims on his way. Okay,
give it just a minute enough.
He might be in for a little
surprise.
We might want to prepare him.
We don't have representatives.
Maura here either anywhere
Yeah. I don't know what they're
doing over there in the house,
except three hour debates on
Everything. Yeah.
Remember, you've got a whole
bunch of over here.
Raul Young House members once
upon a time. Well, not over on
this side over here. I'm talking
about the three. Really.
Senator. You? Yeah. You got a
joke? Got any material?
Maybe Soto.
Very well. Mr Chairman, members
of the committee this House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 316 related to
public peace, health safety and
Two years in a row.
I think we passed the last two
years in a row and we'll come
back for third year and this
this is a bill that would, uh
increase
The penalty for a felon in
possession of a firearm.
And, uh and so it would raise it
up to a second degree felony.
And, uh for a second or
subsequent offense.
And, um, and then it would, uh,
make a couple other, um
Basic changes and then in the
Sentencing authority in Section
two would simply add in then
third degree felony for
possession of firearm or
destructive device by a felon.
Ah, that would be five years of
imprisonment. Uh, And with that,
Mr Chairman
I'll be happy to stand for some
initial questions. We may be
coming back to you for some
amendments that is correct.
But we do have some registered
opponents and supporters, so
we'll go to them next.
Just for clarity.
Senator you. You said that this
bill version of this bill has
been before us the last two
years. I believe so past at each
of the last two years. Is that
right? That is my recollection
to years ago, we increased the
penalties for this crime.
Felon in possession from Yes,
that is correct. Last year, we
just increase the penalties for
a felon in possession of firearm
For what? Three years to five
years. That is correct. And then
on top of that, we added a
public health work.
Oh, yeah, that's right. And so
with the public health order and
the increase the penalties two
years in a row from 18 months to
five years into two steps
Do you know anything that would
suggest there's been a
meaningful
Decrease in
Felons in possession of
firearms.
Um, Mr Chairman, I I'm not aware
other than the fact that we have
declared a public health crisis.
And senator has a
Did the word get out to the
felons Do not possess firearms.
Now that we've gone from 18
months to five years of a they
stopped doing that.
Uh, Mr Chairman, uh, to my
knowledge, uh, that memo got
stuck someplace along the way.
Opponents, JD Bullington.
You recommend recognized for up
to a few minutes, sir.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is JT
Bullington, representing the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Super Commerce that supports
this legislation. You know when
the court has ordered a felon
not to possess a gun, it needs
to mean something and needs to
mean that we simply will no
longer tolerate those
individuals who are deemed
dangerous to have a gun would be
allowed to possess those in our
community, so the chamber
strongly supports this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you, Chief Whistler.
Up to two minutes here, please.
Thank you. Mr Chair. A member of
the committee tried research
Chief. New Mexico State police.
Um
You know this this change in the
felony possession, firearm
charges focused on those
individuals are the main drivers
of violent crime in our
communities.
Defenders of this bill deals
with have been one previously
convicted of a felony and to
have decided now armed
themselves.
While being a convicted felon
and three or two A, which is
usually the case they're usually
involved in some of the other
type of crime, which brought him
into contact with law
enforcement on this occasion and
found out for us to find out
that they had a firearm on in
their possession.
Um
This is a fairly regular charge
in our crime Suppression Bureau.
Which is investigating repeat
offenders and encounters armed
individuals on a regular basis.
State police feels that this
bill will help have a positive
impact.
I will public safety and on
dealing with the repeat
offenders in the community.
Thank you.
Huge chief.
Have to registered opponents.
Maybe three. Looks like someone
here representing
The office of the public
defender.
Miss Chavez, you
You're recognized for up to two
minutes, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee Rickie Lee
Chavez on behalf of the law
office of the Public defender.
We do stand in opposition to
House Bill 316. Unlike
sentencing enhancements for
using a firearm during the
commission of a crime, this
crime punishes felon simply for
possessing a gun, even if they
never use it.
It is already a crime for felons
to possess a firearm. However,
doing so hardly presents the
same level of risk or danger
associated with committing
violent felonies like armed
robbery or aggravated burglary.
Felon in possession includes
storing a gun in the closet and
does not require carrying it or
using it in any way nor the
commission of any other crime.
The current penalty, which
reflects three increases in the
last four years, is already a
serious crime separately
punishable by federal law if a
felon uses a gun to commit a new
crime will be punished for
possession the new crime and
subject to sentence enhancements
based on the firearm and the
prior felonies.
As it stands, we are punishing
this nonviolent possession crime
more harshly than many violent
crimes like aggravated battery
and aggravated assault.
If HB 316 is adopted, New Mexico
would punish gun possession the
same as actually committing
armed robbery, aggravated
burglary, attempted murder,
shooting at or from a motor
vehicle, resulting in great
butterly harm, kidnapping and
many sexual assaults.
Increasing penalties for felon
in possession is not the
solution to gun violence. The
law office of the Public
defender asks the Senate
Judiciary Committee to oppose
this legislation. Thank you, Mr
Chair, members of the committee.
Somebody representing the A. C l
U registered
Are you here? Mr. Chair? Members
of the committee. My name is
Daniel Williams.
I'm a policy advocate at the
American Civil Liberties Union
of New Mexico, and we do stand
in respectful opposition to this
bill. I don't want to burden the
committee's time by repeating
many of the points that the loss
of the public defender made
which we agree with.
What I will say is that
There is very little evidence as
we have discussed that increase
sentences have a significant
positive impact on public
safety. In fact, there is plenty
of evidence that shows that
harsher sentences do little to
deter crime and little to deter
to reduce recidivism rates and
may even in many cases have a
criminal genic effect. The only
sure thing is that increasing
the sentences will put further
strain on our already
overburdened detention
facilities.
And put more tax money, taxpayer
money towards incarceration when
those resources could be used
for other proactive measures or
investments.
We're still struggling with the
disastrous effects of harsh
sentencing introduced during the
so called war on drugs. That's
not repeat history but instead
seek out evidence based
solutions when it comes to gun
violence for those reasons, and
for the reasons that you heard
from the public defender's
department. We oppose this,
bill. Thank you. Thank you,
representative for the New
Mexico Criminal Defense Lawyers
Association, Okay?
Same thing as the public
defenders.
She spoke for the public
defender's defense lawyers got
it, alright.
Okay?
Position center. Every Soto
Oh, hi. Represent, um, I'm
sorry.
Join the slate. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. And I'm sorry. Um, my
secretary had called and said it
wasn't on the schedule, so
I, uh was a little I was away
from the capital if I could make
a couple opening remarks I'd
like to if I could, of course.
Mr Chairman and members of the
committee.
When we see felons and with
firearms, whether we hear the D
A say we want to take this
federally.
Now if they take it, federally.
The problem with the federal
system is since there is a
firearm involved, you cannot
have probation or deferred
sentence.
And so this is an option that we
keep it in state court. I want
you to understand while you look
at five years for first offense
and nine per second, it's really
025 and 0 to 9.
The judge has complete
discretion.
And, uh, we've and this also
applies to the good time.
So this is a 5050 good time bill
as well.
Whereas the federal system is an
exact time that you're sentenced
Um
I've didn't have a lot of
handouts and I kind of threw a
couple of them around.
But the D. A. Sam Bregman
supports this. If you look at
the data here, what they're
looking at is second degree 1st
and 2nd degree murders and you
see that 40% of those people
that 1920 1922.
2022 committed murder.
Had been a convicted felon when
you look at the 63% of them had
been charged with a prior felon.
So it's important that we
address this issue as well as
this legislatures addressing
other gun issues. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. With that I'll stand
for questions, representative.
Alright and I had missed for
opponents.
Registered dietitian cashews on
Zoom She still with us?
Ms McAskie, You can hear me
You're recognized for two
minutes.
Thank you so much. This bill
previously existed White closely
as HB 46 and was tabled in HC
pack. It was brought back as hb
316 directly to H. J C. Passed
on the house floor with the
opposition of just 11 courageous
members. So now it's up to you.
There exists no evidence that
increasing yet again the
penalties for felon in
possession of a firearm or
destructive advice will make the
public safer. What we do know is
that longer sentences whatever
their length will increase jail
and prison populations,
increased jail and prison
populations make working in
jails and prisons more dangerous
and makes being an inmate in a
jail or prison more dangerous,
and it's also expensive.
If enacted, these increased
years, incarceration could apply
to someone, whether or not the
weapon was used in any
threatening or harmful way. I
don't believe adding the two or
six years. Incarceration to the
current penalty makes sense for
reducing crime or increasing
public safety. And as a
taxpayer, I really do not want
my taxes used in this way. Thank
you so very much for coming back
to me a cash
Alright Committee members,
questions comments
I don't know when you thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, representative. I'm just
trying to understand why this is
necessary given that we've
apparently for the last two
sessions have increased
penalties like for this very,
very issue for this very
criminal. Why is this necessary?
Mr Doesn't it already exists?
Like you know that situation?
But why is why is this
necessary?
Uh, Mr Chairman and
Representative O'Neill, um, to
give you need, er, cetera. Okay,
Proud of your former rep. Yeah.
I'm sorry. Um
Give you an example. If you
remember August 19th 2021
There was an individual came to
New Mexico. He was convicted
felon.
He was from California. And he
came here because of our lax
laws.
Is the individual that robbed
the teenager of his backpack.
The four police officers
confronted him.
And there was a shootout that
occurred. All four officers were
shot and he was shot.
He was arrested. Obviously for
that.
But our current, uh, law is
three years and this gives the
prosecutor the option to go
ahead and, you know, have a
stiffer sentence rather than
going to federal court.
And it keeps it in state court
where they have more leeway in
sentencing.
That is really the issue with
this but be somewhat similar to
federal penalties.
Thank you. Thank you. So
If we enact this bill, then we
can gives the judge more
options. I mean, it keeps it out
of the federal system because
currently it would go to the
federal
With with what you're saying.
Mr Chairman, and Senator
O'Neill, The prosecuting
attorney has an option to ask
the feds to take the case. They
don't take all the cases. But if
they take the case, then their
penalties are much stricter than
Mexico, and they don't allow
probation or a deferred
sentence.
Okay?
Thank you, representative. Mr
Chairman, So the D A is
currently do not have that
option. Mr Chairman and Senator
O'Neill. They don't have the
options that I'm going to give
them and this legislation. This
will give them more, um, leeway
to go ahead and charge a higher
crime.
Rather than take it to federal.
Okay. All right. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you Sort of
So, Mr Chairman and
representative dream. Let me get
this straight you you're doing
this.
So that the judges have the
option of giving someone less
time.
Um, Mr Chairman and Senator Ivey
Soto, not to give not to give
them less time but to give the
prosecutors
A more tools in their tool test
if you will.
They can go federal. Still even
with this bill, or they could go
ahead and used this penalty to
go ahead and charge the
individual.
So given your
Given the examples that you've
used
Mr Chairman and representative
and and given the, uh, given the
testimony from the
Lots of the public defender.
Uh, it seems to me that what
we're really after isn't so much
a felon.
In possession of a firearm.
But I fell in who uses a
firearm is that Is that really
what we're after then? Mr
Chairman and Senator Ivey Soto.
It's like the felon who has the
firearm who's intending to curd
met an armed robbery or murder
but hasn't committed the crime
yet.
So you know a lot of times we
catch all of thieves in a car
that there that they've stolen
to use in a different crime.
You know?
To to, like hide their identity.
They do that if they plan a
drive by shooting if they plan a
bank robbery many times will
seal. They'll steal a car, use
it as their getaway car and then
ditch it and get into something
else.
So an individual who is a felon.
At the time of sentencing.
Hmm. Has told the judge
And acknowledges that he cannot
own a firearm.
And so he knows that he can't
own a firearm but having a
firearm, he's using it to
further some other crime
generally.
Sure it and and and I hear what
you're saying.
But really are it is with our
concern is that they're actually
using the gun in a
The question of a crime.
Mr Chairman and Senator Ivey
Soto. Both sides, So using it in
a crime is one of the problems
But if we can make the penalty
stiff enough where there
If you will going from a gun to
a knife, It's a better option
for us. I get that I get that. I
just think that we ought to be
precise about what we mean.
Chairman.
And so I've been I've been
doodling while we've been
chatting here If I may, and and
I've and I have a few
suggestions to make him and
basically miss German, let me
just let me just let you all
know where I'm headed is is
instead of making this Ah
Um
Possession by a felon would be
used by a felon.
Of a gun.
Um, is if we're going to ratchet
up the penalties this much
Ah is is where I'm looking at
this point.
And so, uh, Mr Chairman, what?
I'd what I'd like to suggest.
Are the following changes and if
I could just leave the the
committee through a series of
these and I'll I'll go a little
bit slow to make sure that
everybody
Uh, follows along.
Particularly Emily and while she
glares at me
Uh, as I as I continued through
these, so it'll be starting on
Page one line, 12.
After the word four.
Insert the word used by
And then on the same line
strike.
In possession.
And then a judge. One line 14.
She has after the word, Um
Of
Insert the words used by
And after the word felon strike
in possession.
On line 16 Page one.
After the word four.
Answer the words used by
And I'm line 17 after the word
felon strike in possession.
And just real quick before we go
on that would make the title
read, increasing the penalty for
use by a felon of a firearm or
destructive device to five years
imprisonment, adding a new crime
of use by
Uh, that should be used by a
felon have to add the word A
before the word Fallon used by a
felon of a firearm or
destructive device for second or
subsequent offense.
And a new penalty of nine years
imprisonment, increasing the
penalty.
For use by a serious, violent
felon.
Of a firearm or destructive
device to nine years
imprisonment.
Okay, Emily, are we
Okay, Very good. And then it
would be then on page one line
24.
Uh, striking transportation or
possession.
And insert the word use in the
title.
And
Page two.
Before the colon.
Ah!
Insert
Uh,
Two.
Page two. Line two before the
column. Thank you.
Insert to facilitate the
commission.
Of
A non capital.
Felony.
To facilitate
The commission.
Of a non capital.
Felony.
And then on page two line 15.
After the word
Felon.
Strike the words found in
possession of
And insert, who uses
And on line 16.
After the word device.
Insert
The same phrase as above to
facilitate.
The commission.
Of a non
Capital felony. We'll use that
phrase a few times.
And then
H two line 21 after the word
felon.
Strike from the word that to the
end of the line.
Line 22 strike possession of
And insert who uses and then
after device, insert
To facilitate the commission of
a non capital felony.
And then we do that one more
time.
On Page three.
Line four strike.
Receives transports or
possesses.
Answer the word uses.
And after the word firearm,
insert
To facilitate the commission.
Of a non capital felony.
And then the
The last change. I would and
then I do have one other chance
to suggest it's a slightly
different categories. So let me
let me go with those real quick
and then I do have one other
amendment make after that.
We could have a discussion on
that first. Yes, that is
correct. That is correct. Line
four.
That is correct.
So, yes. So it is again. Uh,
Age one. Well, I got the title
and then page one.
After the title. We got the
title of Section one. But then
in the text, we've got Page two
line two.
To facilitate the commission of
a non capital felony.
Page two line 15.
Striked found in possession of
insert, who uses line 16 after
device to facilitate the
commission with non capital
felony.
Page two line 21.
And 22 strike that is found to
be in possession of
And insert and lose their of
Who uses
And also online 22 after the
word device.
Insert to facilitate the
commissioner, Non capital
felony.
Page three line four Strike
receives transports are
possesses.
Insert and Luke uses.
And after the word firearm,
insert to facilitate the
commission.
Of a non capital felony.
And that way, then what we're
punishing is a felon who
actually uses the firearm in the
commission on Capital felony.
Were that's That's the level of
the party, Mr Chairman and
Senator Ivey Soto. Um, as I
understand you're making a new
section of law.
And should we go down to page
one line 21.
And
And 22 and strike that and say
new material.
Age one.
Why 21 and 22 and make this new
material.
Because you're doing away with
simple possession of a firearm.
Um
Yeah.
Fair enough. We can do that on
online 23 strike the strike 30.
That's seven deaths. 16.
And insert new material.
Okay, so that that case
possession would be one level
use would be another level.
And Mr Chairman. I wonder if we
need to do that on strike, Um,
lines 21 and 22 also correct?
Yeah, that we would do that as
well up there where it says
Section one.
We just say we we would strike
all that it would just be new
material.
A new section.
Of the N s A is enacted. Yeah,
I'll have all that. Certainly.
So so beginning
On page one line 21.
After the after it, says Section
one strike the rest of the line
and line 22.
And it's and insert in lieu
thereof.
A new section.
Of the USA 1978 isn't is enacted
to read column.
And online 23.
Strike 30-7 Dash 16
And insert and Luther of in
brackets, new material all caps.
That's the motion before us
right now.
Represent real.
Mikey likes it. He likes it
in the moors. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
representative. I'm not sure
Marquee likes it. Um, What does
Senator Ivey Soto is use of a
firearm? How is that defined in
statute? Is that defined as a
crime already? We have
brandishing about five
established law, but I've never
seen
Use of a firearm used for
What? You brandish it. You shoot
it. You can nail a hammer with
it or nail hammer and nail with
it.
Where is use of a firearm
defined in statute.
Mr Chairman and Senator Morris
use would use we would use for
use.
The common usage cabin usage of
the term to use so possess it
would be more than possessed.
Be more than possessed, because
if you're possessing, you're not
using it.
Uh, uses something active. So
possession is is is passive.
Mr Chair, Senator. Um then why
not say brandish?
Mr Chairman. Why not say Naylor
hammer and nail? Why not say
Shoot it? Why uses me a pretty
nebulous term? You You have it
on you If you show it and
brandish it is that using
Mr Chairman, Senator Morris that
would be using using would also
be pistol whipping somebody with
it. Using would also be let's
say, for example, you have your
stash of federal extra house.
The cops come to raid your house
to get the fentanyl. You have a
gun in the house.
You possess a gun.
In the house.
If you don't pick it up, you're
guilty of possession.
If you do pick it up to defend
your stash of fentanyl.
Now you're whether you shoot it
or not, You're guilty of use.
And is there somewhere where
this is? We've used this and
other statutes.
Um all memorized, I would assume
you know the answer to that.
The the use. Uh, I would share.
Certainly I would I would yell
to representative rib.
I'll bet it
Mr Chair, and, um, senators, I
guess I'm kind of concerned that
if you put the use of in there,
you're going to conflict with so
many other statutes. Um
Where the felony possession of a
firearm is.
Possessing a firearm using a
firearm, Mr Chair and is more of
an enhancement issue.
When you do a an enhancement for
a firearm crime, So I'm trying
to jump up to speed just walking
in here, but I think it's going
to conflict with a bunch of
other
Existing law and mess those
statutes up Mr Chair.
Anybody makes Senator
Please. So
Representatives are catching up
with us. So let me maybe try and
make it a little simpler. The
We've heard quite a bit of
testimony that we have increased
the penalties for
Uh, possession by a felon.
Two years in a row. I think they
said three times in the last
four years over the sequence of
steps. We've taken it from 18
months to three years to five
years.
I've asked a lot of questions
whether we've seen any
consequence. As a result of that
sentencing. You may know the
answer that I don't I don't
imagine you do because that's
hard to imagine that we've seen
any corresponding decrease in
Felons in possession.
So that's where we started with
this bill. We also heard quite a
bit of testimony from public
input that, um
They would suggest to us
That we may be capturing with
these increased penalties for
just possession were cat. We're
capturing people that we may not
intend to capture and we're not
capturing people that are
actually using
Firearm in commission of a
crime. So there's a purposeful
effort. Just so you know, by
center risottos amendments,
which I support to create
effectively a different crime,
which is the felon who not only
is in possession but used in the
commission of a crime.
And evidently that's not a
crime. I'm surprised to learn
that you've described it as an
enhancement.
Which is the way I think it's
being treated as a sentencing
Hasn't we're considering
amending this to create this as
a new crime?
So that a felon who actually
uses a gun
Our firearm in the commission of
a crime has is captured by this
new language and
I've encouraged the discussion
of the amendment and I'll
support it.
Principally because
Understandably, in this session.
We've had a lot of discussion
about gun and gun use and gun
ownership, and one of the
arguments is frequently made is
that we're punishing law abiding
gun owners by the efforts that
we're making this session and
and this, I think tackles that
directly, which is where we're
talking about enhancing or
creating penalties for people
that use a gun.
For an unlawful.
Criminal purpose. That's the
amendments that I think Senator
risottos working on and I want
to get you up to speed. So
you're right. Your observation
is correct, Senator Ream, and
we'll go back to center of
risotto. I saw the floor, Mr
Chair.
Do you know That was my question
He was answering. All right, so
I just I just wanted to point
out you know, the the brand
machine and possessing is
something that we use in law
with my extensive legal
background in the last eight
years on this community, my
honorary law degree that you
have bestowed upon me that
you've told me that we needed a
used terms that are defined in
law established law and not be
squishy and
The term use of a firearm seems
to cheer. Thank you, Senator.
Every soil and then come to you.
Center portal. Every sort of
remember. Alright Center in, um
Mr Chairman, and Senator Ivey
Soto, where the confusion is,
and I think that this is what we
need to do. We need to define
the word users, and I think if
we put a definition in here what
that means, you know, similar to
brandish Sheen or whatever. Then
I think this is
That would that would clear up
Senator Moore's issue and make
this a better bill.
And this is this is where you
can help us with your
prosecutorial background. I have
heard the word brandishes. I
know there is a crime for bread
if we were to substitute the
word uses with the word
brandishes or discharges does
that does that cover it?
Mr Chair. Um, Committee? I'm not
sure because I'm looking at a
case Maybe senator can look it
up Coke and Derby Lawson and
there's a statute
unconstitutionally vague, where
the subject to arbitrary
enforcement potential defendants
need to be on notice of what
conduct is prohibited and what
the penalty is. I think we do
need to actually have some type
of definition.
I know there's crimes for
brandishing. I also think of
him, though Mr Chairs AG assault
with a deadly weapon is kind of
brandishing a firearm also
because you're using threats or
menacing conduct, which could be
brandishing. That's 1/4 degree
felony. I just think it's really
going to need to be defined.
I've never seen used
Any other way More so than, um,
I guess an aggravated battery
with a deadly weapon where you
shoot someone in you use a
firearm or deadly weapon, but
still, ultimately, I think when
you're enhancing, those jury has
to make the actual finding that
they used a firearm in the
commission of the felony. So, as
you said, I've only seen it
enhanced. Um
I just think it would really
need to be defined. And maybe
that would
Help but brandishing and I
I mean, I don't know. There's
got to be definitions for
brandishing could use And
actually, if I may, Mr chairman
there, some friend impression
there are definitions of I will
tell you, though, that
If you if you look at Ah 31-18.
That's 15.1.
Um, that section
Has. AH, that's a alteration
basic sentence, mitigating or
aggravating circumstances of
procedure.
This is for for person of the
section the following should not
be considered.
Aggravating circumstances, the
use of a firearm.
So it's
We? We, actually ah.
Have that term.
Already in law.
Ah, using firearm in this case,
when you know as as provided in
31 1816, but 31 1816.
Doesn't have a it doesn't have a
definition of uses Got
definition require grandest in
relation to drug transactions
Here is falling offense but not
definition of use.
Uh um.
It's just simply what I've
separate finding of fact by the
court or jury shows their farm
was used, brandished or
discharge but used to separate
Ah, and that's so Ah!
That's not better problem in
these other statutes.
And that's why Senator I
suggested maybe, and in lieu of
used
I think your last enhancement
would be used, brandish or
discharge. There's an or in
their right. But
But I understand what you're
saying, which is used has been
used used to build has been used
and we have not used the
definition for use.
Um, referred to kind of used to
it. Yeah. Yeah. Mr Chairman and
Senator Ivey Soto, Should we put
in here when we talk about one
of those?
As referenced in, You know,
31-18 whatever as used them.
Yeah, as used in. Yeah, I really
I think it's fine, I think
because it's used elsewhere it
that because the term
Is elsewhere in the statute. I
don't think we need to
And it doesn't have a definition
elsewhere. I don't think we need
to try to define it here. I
think we do more damage than
good.
Mr Chair, I think typically when
somebody is using a firearm in
the commission of a crime,
there's different underlying
crime.
There's an underlying crime and
they are doing something active.
Yes, I'm not sure where we're at
accepted.
I think
We're either gonna take used as
adequate, which I think etcetera
risottos, arguing.
Representative, I gotta look at
you carefully, which is you
prosecuted these before and I
lasted once up, getting reversed
for vagueness.
And Mr Chair or in your worried
about just leaving the word
possession in there because
you're afraid that that's going
to punish people have raised
these penalties previously, and
it's going to punish people.
More than they need to be
punished. Is that my
understanding?
Of the underlying kind of
thoughts on it. Mr Chair
Chairman representative. We've
Raise the punishment.
A year off, raise the punishment
again.
Then raise the punishment again.
And now we're back here this
year on the same crime.
I guess that Mr Chair. I mean,
only argument I would make on
that is in crime Has I'm not
saying specifically in this area
but has risen and firearm crimes
have risen. Um and
Generally when you prosecute a
homicide or robbery generally
have a firearm felon in
possession of firearm crime with
it, And when you actually look
at felon in possession of
firearm, it's one of those
crimes that you still have to
have the additional felony to
enhance it. So you you lose that
one felony. So you you don't
have the mandatory year on a
habitual
Um and then, so it's just I've
always seen it connected with a
very serious crime. I would say
80% of the homicides I
prosecuted has a felon in
possession of a firearm crime
with it.
Um So I mean, I understand what
you're saying is I don't have
the statistics. But I would
argue, Mr Chair that crime is
going up and I don't believe
even if we just use the word
possession that were
We're going to be punishing
people who aren't generally
committing some type of bad
crime.
But it's Mr It's represented
Dreams, Bill, So you know,
however, he wants to put that
Uh, Mr Chairman, you know, when
Senator Ivey Soto, I see that we
leave the possession at three
years and you know if you're
going to use it in a crime we're
now gonna say if it's the first
conviction, it's five years and
or up to five years, and if it's
second it's up to nine.
Is that kind of the way that you
see it, Senator Ivey Soto.
Ah!
Mr Chairman. The Yes. So the
language that we're using here
is really it's the complete
language right? Is talking about
using a firearm. This is a farm
to facilitate the commission of
a non capital felony.
Right. And so it's
That's the that's. The thing is
that it's it's
It's not simply the use of the
gun. It's It's used a gun when
you're
In the further itself.
And I think that's that's that's
where we That's where we clarify
the
What? What Use means in this
case.
Um
So
Anyways, I'm
Uh,
I mean, you know, ultimately
it's the it's the It's a leave
it to the
Sponsors. But I I did hear from
representatives in that he
thought it was a
Was it worthy?
Change, particularly for making
a new sexual law.
Uh, Mr Chairman and Senator Ivey
Soto. Yes, and I and I see
exactly the rationale. We're
going to stair step it up,
depending on
On
You know your criminal behavior,
right?
So
Thank you, Mr Chair.
So is this with the addition of
use?
Is that what we're we're adding
on correct
I think we're comfortable with
at this point.
I think there's there's an issue
that I have with it just with
the just with the word in
general, because my thought kind
of goes back to somebody that
might have goofed up whenever
they were young. And then it's
been 2025 years later.
And they're out at a range on a
private range somewhere.
And all of a sudden now they're
using
A firearm.
But they're not really harming
anybody.
And so I think if
If the intent is obviously for
people that are doing nefarious
activity, But my thoughts just
keep going back to those that
that maybe weren't harming
anybody.
Um, that
If you use it.
To commit a crime. There's
already a crime for that, so I
don't know.
That we necessarily need to have
this. If they brandish it, then
you can charge them under the
brandishing if they
Shooting from a vehicle that's
already a crime if they you
know, on down the list that I
don't know that this is
necessary to put in use because
we already have sections allow
that deal with that.
I mean, I just feel like you
will use it or lose it so
Others.
I'll join it. Let me let me set
a portal to your point and for
others.
The
The crime of possessing a
firearm by felon.
We've increased the penalties
now. This would be the third
time in three years started out
as 18 months turned to three
years. Five years. This would
take it tonight or a felon in
possession. The example that we
hypothetically discussed back in
the office is a person who has a
gun in their house in the closet
someplace there, a felon.
Um somebody comes in for a drug
raid or something like that and
finds the gun in the closet and
now you're a felony position
You're going to do nine years
for that.
I joined the thinking of
something that seems excessive
to me.
Under the circumstances.
The gun may be in the trunk of
your car and
Shouldn't be there. Your felon.
You should have your with this
bill, if you if you pass that
wealthy amendment that persons
that my understanding this
correctly
It's discretionary so, but the
possibility Yes. Nine years you
forgot to guns in the trunk of
the car back of the truck back
of the trailer.
Um, you're you're a felon. You
shouldn't have it.
Your subject to do nine years.
It seems excessive. And it also
seems that we've done this
repeatedly. Year after year. It
seems like an annual thing.
Let's increase these penalties
and capture headlines and feel
good about
And beat our chest, but
I, There's There's certainly
nothing to indicate we've
accomplished anything. In fact,
you said crime is increasing and
Arguably
About any consequence here, So
so really, what I'm proposing is
something we've discussed,
really trying to tackle What my
friends on both sides of the
aisle been talking about, which
which lets go after after people
who are using guns for bad
things supposed to just going
after guns and I and I hear that
argument a lot. This session,
which is, let's not punish
people that are responsible gun
owners, I consider myself one of
them.
Let's not let's not punish
responsible gunners. Let's go
after the people that are
irresponsible guns and go after
them hard and and I think that's
what this amendment proposes to
do is not
Not criminalized, not increase
the penalties for the crime that
already exists for possession by
a felon, but rather to create
and what would be a new crime.
Really, uh, for a felon who is
in possession and uses that to
facilitate a crime? I think
Senator episode is right. The
word uses modified by the to
facilitate
So that seems to address that
are more concerned use would be
undefined, and it could be a
problem if you prosecuted
someone and convicted them and
you just had used in the court
said That was ambiguous. And
we're gonna we're gonna reverse
the conviction, but But if the
language is used to facilitate,
I think there's enough guidance
there in the law legitimate
crime.
So I'm supporting this. I'll
just tell you for the sponsors.
if your if your bill was to
proceed
Simply didn't continue to
increase penalties on possession
for the third year in a row and
take it up to potentially nine
years. I'd have a really hard
time supporting that because we
just we just keep doing this and
and I think it doesn't really
serve any purpose that I can see
other than again. Political
Up on crime, but But if if we
adopt the amendment, and we make
a crime
Harsh crime. Nine years for a
felon who possesses a fireman
and uses it to commit a crime.
Um, that should be a person who
I think deserves a pretty harsh
sanctions. I can support this
bill with the amendment, but I
hope you understand what we're
doing here.
So Sarah Baca.
Now that we've tweaked Mr Chair,
could we go back to the sponsors
and see if there's still
friendly or not friendly or
where they sit on the amendment
as it stands?
Mikey's still likes it, and he's
convinced his go hard here to
like it as well.
Other committee members were on
the amendment.
Any other discussion on the
amendments are Moore's. You used
to facilitate that the word used
to facilitate. Yes, Mr Chairman,
uh, uses to facilitate the
commission of a non capital
felony.
Any other discussion.
Any objection. The adoption
amendment.
The amendment is adopted. Thank
you.
With that on the bill as amended
other members questions
Almonds.
Motions.
Chairman. I wouldn't move to
pass as amended.
Any other discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
pass motion as amended?
Show Senator Stewart No. All
other members. Yes.
Representative. You have a do
pass as amended. Thank you.
Mr Chairman. It's good to see
you, representative. Yeah, just
like old times. Yep. Thank you.
Senator worth
Stuart's feel me.
We miss you guys.
We missed those three hour
debates.
Knock it off.
Alright, represents tomorrow.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair members
of the committee.
House Bill 239.
Go.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee in front of you have
house Bill 239 to 39. It's a
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House consumer
and Public Affairs Committee
Substitute.
Relating to corrections,
including cannabis in the
definition of contraband
prohibiting cannabis in places
of imprisonment or detention.
Providing exceptions, Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee
This bill? Uh,
I've worked on a couple of
sessions already.
Ah!
What happened is when cannabis
was legalized. It was taken off
the contraband list.
In Fort Sumner. We had a
instance where
Somebody took cannabis into the
jail, and the district attorney
didn't feel like he could
prosecute.
Because it was off the
Of the contraband list, and
we're here trying to fix that
today.
With that will stand for
questions. Mr. Chairman. Anybody
ready for
Let's see. We don't We're the
only the only, um, person
registered to speak is for the
proponent.
Are you standing in for the
chief?
Right?
Come on up. I'll recognize you
for two minutes.
In support. Am I right, sir?
Sir Deputy Chief Dale Wagner,
the New Mexico State police and
we strongly support this bill.
Thank you.
Man of few words.
All right. That's right.
Committee members, other
discussion
Senator Every Soto. Yeah. Thank
you, Miss Sherman. I really
appreciate that. You guys
Did do a carve out for medical
in prison, not aware of how much
they allow medical, cannabis and
president But the fact that you
guys make sure that that was
carved out
Uh, I think that is, uh
I think that's appropriate. And
I and I appreciate your thank
you very much.
So there's a distinction in this
bill.
Ah, for those watching online
between
Between smuggling in
Smuggling in
Cannabis versus
The prescription of medical
cannabis to a an inmate to be
allowed.
Correct, Mr Chair. That's my
understanding, Senator.
Thank you very much. Alright.
Any other serum? Ors? Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Um, I'm looking
at your exemption on medical
cannabis, but it doesn't say in
here representative of that they
have to have a medical cannabis
card.
So you're exempting medical
cannabis without exempting,
saying that they actually have
to have a card because they're
coming after That clause comes
after defined as the cannabis
Regulation Act.
You're defining what cannabis
is. But then you're saying
medical cannabis is exempt. But
you're not saying the prisoner
has Mr Chairman and, uh
Senator Moore's I believe
That in an instance like that,
it
They're not gonna let somebody
Takes medical cannabis to a
patient in the jail.
That's going to be controlled by
the jail.
Or the doctor. So so
There's a patient necessarily
have to have a cannabis card if
a doctor's prescribing them
cannabis.
I think would be the question.
I could see the your life is
meaningless. If you don't accept
The person has to have a medical
card because you're just gonna
have
Bricks of medical cannabis
showed up at prisons and
everyone's going to say it's a
matter.
Mr Chair, and, um, Senator, I
think we could add medical card
in there, but the way that I
have seen it where I would
envision it to work is
That they would be working with
the medical professionals in the
jail and if they have a medical
card or medical prescription,
they would be allowed to get
their cannabis. You know, at the
jail through the proper
procedures, you know, but if we
need to add medical card in
there, I think that would, um,
having a little trouble this Mr
Chairman and Senator Morris
Ah, if we put medical card in
there
And the way the language is
written, is somebody that has a
medical card going to be able to
take cannabis illegally into the
jail.
Mr Chairs, representatives. Your
bill, you tell me.
I think, Mr Chair in, Um,
Senator, We don't want people
just because truthfully, many
people can get medical cannabis
cards that don't really need
medical cannabis cards. I think
the idea and the intent behind
this is that they would work
with the jail staff and of
course, they have doctors and
nurses and people that are
staffed with them. That would
Be deciding if that is validly
something they need or
prescription or if they're
actually just trying to bring it
into spread it out to the
inmates, So we have to leave
some discretion of that with the
jail facilitator. Um, in my
opinion, Mr
Um, Mr Chair, Representative.
Okay. Um, I don't think your
language here prevents people
from just bringing the medical
just say it's medical. So, um,
over. You have a lot more
experience than I do. And this
Mr Chair and
it's I think it's it's going to
be working with the jail
administrator. Obviously, we
don't want people just bringing
in Bunches of marijuana, even
probably on their person as a
prescription. I would think it's
going to be more of a situation
where they're going to meet with
the medical staff and then
figure that out.
From there.
Then you're also going to go
back. Mr. Chair, Senator,
Senator, too.
The discretion of what you're
going to charge as a prosecutor
when they're coming in, and if
their intent is to sneak in
marijuana or cannabis, it's
going to be a lot different
than um, you know, a situation
where they have a prescription
and generally to be very honest.
When they walk into a jail, Mr
Chair and Senator, they will ask
you. Do you have any
Any types of substances that
could be considered illegal
before you enter the jail. And
if they have a prescription for
medical marijuana or have that
on their person, That's our
chance right then to turn it
over and you don't get charged
at that point, and then at that
point when they'll talk to the
medical professionals and make
sure that it's something that
they legally could have, and
then they'll monitor to make
sure it's you know, probably
administered.
Like you would administer, you
know, some type of medication.
It's not like they're just going
to give them a pack of gummies
and say, Hey, enjoy, you know,
it's going to be one of those
things, Mr Chair where it's
administered by their their
medical professionals. Miss
Chair representative, Um
I think we give medical cards to
anyone who wants it. They can't
sleep if you had a bad
nightmare, so I think everyone
in prison is going to have a
medical card under this law, And
so I can't imagine.
Anyone not asking
For medical card if they wanted
to smoke weed in prison, So
thank you, Mr Chair. I think
there's a huge loophole here
that you could
Smokable through.
Thank you. Thank you. Others.
Stewart. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
So it's my understanding that
this provision is also in Senate
Bill, six of which just passed
the House floor.
So we don't really need this
anymore. They voted on it today.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and senators.
Ah!
The reason we have kept going
forward with this bill.
It's because what if
If the other one doesn't
And and we still don't fix the
problem that we have in the
state.
This. This particular bill has
had input
From
From
Representative Chandler
representative Romero.
We've been working across the
aisle with him.
And we've discussed whether we
dropped quit.
Quit running this bill.
And just let the Cannabis Act
Bill.
Proceed.
But our concerns on both sides
of the aisle are what if
They have trouble with their
bill.
So, so we're looking forward.
To passing
Either or or both, And then, and
then we can take care of that.
at the end of the session to the
governor can either sign one or
the other or combine them or
Or whatever needs to be done
there.
Mr Chairman and Senator.
Mr Chairman. This bill is in
Senate Bill six, which just
passed the floor of the House
Today Authority passed the
Senate. It will have to come
back for some concurrence. I
know they amended it over there,
So I mean, it's up to you, but I
mean, this is in the Senate Bill
six, which they just
Asked on their floor today.
Alright, hold on, So I got
Central Neeleman Center.
It sounds like moved to table.
Quite work that way. No motion
before us is a motion to table.
It's not debatable. Take a roll
call on the table.
Arriving stuff, Tonio.
Senator. Servants. No.
The motion fails.
Do pass motion before the
committee.
Other set of poodle.
You have to ask me recognized.
Oh, that's it.
That it anyone else?
Do pass motion. I just like to
add a couple of things. I
appreciate very much. Senator
Stewart alerting us to the fact
that we have covered this. The
other bill also understand the
sponsors concerned that that
Bill is not passed law yet, and
so this may be as far as we get.
This is a challenging issue
because I heard Senator Abby so
to say, we appreciate the fact
that you carved out
Medical marijuana, which means
that what I understand him to be
saying is he favors the ability
to have medical marijuana in the
prison systems.
Um, and that's what I hear his
position to be. And then I hear
my colleague and things that are
Morris probably rightfully
saying that everyone will then
get a medical marijuana card and
everybody in the prisons will be
able to get marijuana. I guess
the first question I have is,
Will the state be supplying the
marijuana?
If we've heard that argument
throughout this session that
marijuana is medicine, we had
had this debate and discussion
when it was drive through
Windows. The argument in this
committee on the floor as well,
marijuana as medicine. Too many
people, and so we should allow
drive through windows because we
have Walgreens and we allow
medicine through the window to
there, too. So if you take that
argument, which I don't embrace
and disagree with, But if you
take that argument to its
logical conclusion, then
Yes, people in prison should be
able to smoke marijuana, and
presumably, the state should
supply it because I imagine our
prison system is responsible for
providing medicine to people in
our prisons, and I certainly
support that. So yes, I think
we're in a situation where we're
going to resolve all of our
concerns with marijuana Market
and plant count and everything,
because we'll just have
everybody in prison stone at all
times.
And the state will supply it so
we can probably start producing
a lot more dope than we already
have. But anyway, I'm being a
little facetious except to see
that when we do these things, we
really have to take them all the
way to their logical conclusion
that I still think this makes
sense because you're trying to
treat this as contraband for
now. I don't think we're
addressing them.
The medical issue, except that
we're leaving it the way it is
now. We're not. We're not
addressing it. We're not making
it better. We're not making it
worse. We're gonna hunt that to
another day. It seems to me so
all support the bill, but I
think we even not addressed
pretty significant issue that we
should at some point.
Anyone else we're gonna do. Pass
motion. Emily roll, please.
Send around a circle.
Senator Moore.
Enter a new
Total.
Yes, it would do pass. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee.
Senator. How to me. Oh,
House Bill 151.
Post secondary affirmative
consent.
But you have no
Representative. I'm sorry,
Senator had Emilio, this will
for those here in the audience
will probably be the last item
will take on the agenda today.
Those of you that are waiting
here on S. J. R three and House
Bill eight.
Regrettably, we will probably be
on the floor at five o'clock, so
we pretty much have a hard stop
Five o'clock. So, um, we
probably won't hear the other
two matters will look for a
schedule tomorrow.
And on this last bill, there has
been quite a bit of work done in
the last 24 hours or so there's
a proposed amendment.
Which all proposed
3 83.1 is the flutter. You
should have that.
Two.
Have been trying to work with.
Some of the individuals closely
involved with it, so we'll come
and address the amendment just a
moment. But for now, let's just
start with you, Senator Go ahead
and explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. There
is a public health crisis
occurring in colleges across the
nation.
Nationalist assistance.
Statistics show that one in 10
students will be sexually
assaulted in college, with rates
even higher among students of
intersecting, marginal
marginalized identities. Sexual
violence is more prevalent in
college than any other crime. Mr
Chairman. What this bill does is
it requires trauma, informed
policies and responses by post
secondary educational
institutions that receive state
funds.
It creates partnerships between
universities and local rape
crisis centers to provide some
survivors with free access to
counseling, medical and legal
services. Protect survivors,
then by standards from
punishment if the school student
code of conduct has broken at or
near the incidents of sexual
violence now joining me, Mr
Chairman today are my expert
witnesses.
Alexandra Taylor to my left the
executive director of New Mexico
Elish in of sexual assault
providers and trial lawyer said
Lopez. And with that we stand
for any, um
I'm looking at what we have
registered. We have no
registered proponents. Only one.
Well, we have one registered
proponent Janet.
Godkin on zoom.
Um
Miss Taylor. Mr. Lopez, you want
to add anything briefly, Mr
Chair? No, no, thank you.
Nothing. Alright, very good. We
have registered as a proponent.
Janet got Kim. Do we have
How much do we have? Do we have
miss Godkin on zoom?
Janet Godkin.
All right. Thank you. Then In
that case, we don't have anyone.
On registered supporter
opposition, so we'll go to
members of the committee member
of the committee. I had a
previously moved an amendment.
Renew the motion to amend
By 3 83.1. She is I'm sorry. All
right, let me go back. Miss
Scott can is recognized and
zoom. I'm sorry I overlooked
you, ma'am.
You're recognized for up to two
minutes.
Kotkin.
Am I am I on muted now? Yes,
ma'am, you are and you're
recognized for two minutes.
Thank you very much. Mr Chairman
and members of the community. My
name is Janet Godkin. I am a
member of the Santa Fe chapter
of the National Organization for
Women.
And I'm here in full support for
HB 151. It is an important piece
of legislation and a state
where, as we know, sexual
assault.
Rendering and built on college
campuses.
This bill will formally open the
conversation among young adults
on campuses on the meaning of
consent, established training
for faculty and set up a
framework to enforce title nine.
It is well thought out and well
researched and very much needed
in New Mexico.
I see this bill was planting the
seed and starting the process
for changes in our cultural
behavior and our beliefs. It is
an important first step, and I
hope that you will support it.
Thank you. Thank you, Miss
Godkin, Alright, members of the
committee comments were first of
all the motion before us is the
motion to amend was afraid you'd
ask me that do we have do we
have
Generally described the
amendments. And first of all, I
guess I'll ask the sponsor and
the sponsors help.
Do you consider the amendments
to be favorable, Mr Chairman? We
do. We just have one slight
addition. If that's okay, very
good, And I know there's some.
If you look at the even the
proposed amendment, there's
still some handwritten work even
on the amendment as well, too,
because we're working at this
thing.
Half an hour ago 15 minutes ago.
Um so we'll come to you,
Senator. You can explain that.
But generally members of the
committee
This has been a bill that's been
before us for quite some time. I
had an opportunity during the
interim to work with some of the
proponents of the bill. Um
You all know my
My preferences was which is to
avoid superfluous language in
the statutes to avoid
redundancies to avoid
ambiguities, etcetera, I think
that principally
What the amendment does is to
tighten up the language quite a
bit to eliminate language. This
superfluous and still yet retain
language that is essential to
the proponents.
In the in the goal.
We
Started out with a 24 page bill,
but I got that right last year.
Before the session is a session
came in. We write it down to
about seven pages, and I think
the amendments probably
eliminate maybe a page or two
down to three pages, and it's
still retains the core of what
the proponents need to look so
so I don't think that there's
anything in the amendments that
do more than that.
Avoiding redundancies. We have
some words that are defined.
In the definition section, so we
eliminated the redefinition
elsewhere in the text. That's
just redundancies.
And I think that's really all I
attempted to do with the
amendments here.
Oh, pontificate from just a
moment. I know we're short on
time. But please realize Senator
but with my colleagues here,
too, and on this committee and
the room, too
Those of us that practiced law
and do it every day and have
done it for a long time. The
statutes and the bills we enact
your our laws.
And his lawyers were expected to
know them and the judges are
expected to know them and were
expected to interpret them and
apply them and enforce them
every day, so I look for the
opportunity to eliminate
ambiguities because when we have
ambiguities in the law, we have
litigation and then we wait for
the courts to decide. And then
we wait for the
Appellate courts to decide
whether the trial court got it
right. And then we look for the
next appellate court, and
sometimes we're in court for
seven years, sometimes just to
interpret language that maybe we
didn't get as tight as we should
here, So I work really hard for
that to to try and have really
tight language.
The other thing that I do with
due respect to the proponents of
this bill to is, are you
generally reject statements of
message through legislation? I
don't think that the statutes
are a place where we send a
message and we get that a lot
and some bills, which as well,
why is this language in here
While we need to send a message
That's not in my mind. What
The law books are intended to do
So
That really is my objective.
when I began to work on this and
Miss Cooper's here and I
appreciate her. She met with me
in the interim, and she made a
lot of changes to the bill that
I thought would improve it as a
as a lawyer in the statutes and
you know we don't we don't take
that attitude and every session
We get all kinds of message
bills and all kinds of bills.
That really could be much
better. This is not the only one
that we've done This too. We
took the
The meat inspection bill.
From
4050 pages down to three and in
the end, the proponents were,
uh, supportive of it fully, and
I'm confident that three page
bill did everything the 45 page
bill did as well tuned and
sometimes the longer bills
create even more problems
because you'll have
inconsistencies between one
section another, so tightening
it up serves a lot of purposes
so that that really is a summary
of what the proposed amendments
do.
And I'm looking looking to your
your gang. There, Senator. I
think they're all night in their
heads. They support the
amendments. As I understand it.
I realized they haven't had a
lot of time to study them. But
I hope enough.
Mr Chairman. We do accept the
amendments, and I'm going to
yield to said who just has one
comment where we'd like to add
two words. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Senators proposed amendments
that were single proposal we
would make is on page two of the
amendments. Um under section 14.
Ah!
So appropriate protections in
any investigations, including
confidentiality of offending
conduct.
The parties and witnesses
involved, We would just suppose
proposed, adding the including
confidentiality, um, for
purposes of protecting the, um
complain it and responded, So
help me to understand Ms Lopez.
So paragraph 14 on page two of
the amendment.
I'm sorry Amendment number 14
Mr. Chair got
You. You, you, you. You talking
do you? Do you know what it is?
You want to propose in terms of
that confidential You just
mentioned Yes. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Where does it go?
Amendment number 14 on page
three. Subsection l
Appropriate protections in any
investigation, including
confidentiality of offending
conduct.
After the word investigation
would be a comma, including
confidentiality, comma, right?
No, no comma.
Mr Chair, Senator, if I may. So
if you look at the original bill
You'll see what we're doing is
striking on Page three. Lions
three through six, but then
picking up that appropriate so
appropriate protections in any
investigation of offending
conduct of the parties and
witnesses involved comma,
including confidentiality. Got
it. Yeah. Okay, so, including
confidentiality before the
semicolon.
Correct, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Good. Alright, so that amendment
I'm going to propose we not
accept that part of the
amendment, which one paragraph
88.
Or number eight. Number eight.
Number eight That's already
stricken throughout my
Yeah, well, it's it's you're
showing it.
Struck on your copy.
Yeah. Yeah. Mr Chairman on the
copy that we received numbers
8 1519 26.
Were struck in their entirety.
30.
I was struck.
Ah, the page six edits were
struck.
The page seven edits were left.
For number 30.
Is that correct? And what I'm
gonna
Right, Sean, those struck so
that would be the amendment
would strike those paragraphs.
You've identified the paragraph
30.
We're striking the page six.
edits proposing that we strike
all of paragraph 30. Okay, all
all of paragraph 30, just as we
did on paragraph, 1519 and 26
very well. So strike
All of paragraph 30, all of
Yeah.
Amendment 30. Thank you. Thank
you. Yes, all the amendments and
then the other thing is we have
At the end of
We have on amendment 18.
We have
After the word
Ah!
Programs.
And before the word that we have
Comma, including primary
prevention, bystander.
Intervention and risk reduction.
And then it picks up with with
that.
Correct those handwritten into
paragraph.
18
That is correct. Yes, that's my
That's my proposed amendment,
making perfect sense to
everybody.
Is it making? I'm looking at
everybody who's heads I need to
see nodding nodding. Mr.
Chairman. Yes. All right,
Senator Stewart.
Mr. Chairman, Can someone just
read it to us the way it's going
to be because I cannot tell you
got a book with everything
crossed out.
Stuart, I'm I'm not
understanding your request. So
you're not asking us to read the
full bill? I am because you have
struck so much. I don't know
what's left. And if it reads
well,
You cannot tell that from this
amendment and crossing it out
here. So you know, your staff
just handed me. Hey, yeah, read
active.
I'll try to read this. This is
not the way to do amending.
Right. I agree that and it's not
the way we normally do it.
Senator and
My apologies to everyone to
Unfortunately, we're in near the
last 24 48 hours and so we're
doing things as quickly as we
can, and sometimes it's it's a
little surgical. Mr. Chairman, I
I will. First of all.
Ah!
I commend you and the sponsors
of the bill for the discussions
you've engaged in. I will also
note that the
That the version that
Senator Stewart is looking at
us.
Does have the appearance of a
About fire request from the CIA
and Mr Chairman if I can on Page
two
You know? So this is Section one
a
And then it goes to, um you
can't tell what we're doing, but
at one point, it says, one
reference and affirmative
consent standard in the
determination of whether consent
was given by all parties.
Then to is specified the
requirement for has the
affirmative consent of all their
parties engaged doesn't quite
make forever sense to me, and
that's just the second paragraph
of your amendment. No, You're
right, madam. Sure. I thought I
had struck some language there
that didn't look. It doesn't
look like it's picked up on your
Marked up copy, but let's see if
it's in the amendment itself. I
think when I drafted this was
think it should have read,
specify the requirement for
affirmative consent.
And so we would have struck that
has the
Language chairman. That's
correct. And so that's that the
online 10 has the should be
struck on your marked up copy
center.
Let's see. We got it in the
amendment. Is it in the
amendment correctly?
Doesn't show the CIA aversion,
but the word has should be
stricken on Page two line 10
Juliana coupe with the colleges,
Mr Chair, So in 10, the word has
in the amendments is actually
stricken. So it would read, Um
Help me out here specified their
requirements for the affirmative
consent of all other parties, So
I believe the amendment itself.
Center story is correct. If you
look at paragraph five
You'll see a reference there on
paragraph five that you see
Strike line 10 up to the T. So
tomorrow I'm trying to read it
to make sure it reads well and
the coffee I was given does not
have that. So I just think we're
creating a bit of a mess here.
You're identifying a problem in
the market Copy the reason the
market copies created. Mr Try
and help you not have to go
between the amendments in the
bill and do this yourself, which
is correct to help which one is
correct to see a version which
is intended to help the correct
one is the amendment itself.
Official. The amendment is
written correctly.
The CI markup is inaccurate by
it should have struck those two
words. Mr Chairman, Senator, if
you want us to go through the
main components of the bill with
the amendments would be happy to
It's not necessary.
Actually, Mr Chairman while hold
on sinister, so as the floors
like, you know, I'm trying to
read it to see if the amendment
has captured has not captured a
few words here and there. I've
relinquished the floor as I
read. It is very challenging
What you're trying to do. Center
Street. I'll acknowledge it.
Yeah, equally challenging.
Is that all for now?
Right, Senator. Every soda.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, given
the number of people who may be
watching online and the interest
in this bill, of which there's
Some substantial interest.
And for good reason.
Ah, I would like for us, too, if
we can someone briefly.
Take advantage of Senator
Senator Hart Meals offer.
To walk us through the
amendments.
I think the people who are
watching this
Would benefit
Not to mention the some others
of us in the penalty.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And with
that I'm going to yield to
Juliana Coupe. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Members of Committee.
So on Page one of the original
Bill house, Bill 1 51.2 to 7 to
54.1.
Um, we're striking the bottom
That page lines 23 through 25 so
that it will read a post
secondary educational
Institution.
And then you flip the page lines
one through three on the second
page or strict stricken. Is that
the right help me out stricken
Um, thank you struck, so it
would say a postsecondary
educational institution. Um
That
Must postsecondary institution
Now watch me screw it up.
Shell.
Create all policies and
procedures that number one
reference and affirmative
consent standard in the
determination of whether consent
was given by all parties to
sexual activity. That is really
the important component of this
bill. Number two. Our trauma
informed
A number three that's specified
their requirements for the
affirmative consent of all other
parties engaged in that sexual
activity.
And then online 12 instead of
confirm we have specified that
affirmative consent can ABC and
then online 20 replace lines 20
through 20.
Three to say specify that the
existence of a dating
relationship or sexual relations
shall not alone be affirmative
consent. We strike lines 2425
and line one on page three,
because we're getting rid of any
kind of criminal legal
investigative components of this
bill.
The chairman feels, and we agree
that that can be dealt with in
rules.
Online three on page and just
gives you a real question that
is most of that is laid out in
title nine. Is it not? Okay? Mr
Chairman, Senator? Yes. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you.
Page three line to policies
shall include
Appropriate protections and any
investigation of offending
conduct of the parties and
witnesses involved comma,
including confidentiality, and
then you go down to
11 City.
The new language.
For line seven through 15 help
me out if I'm getting line, 16.
Thank you, Sid.
Um, go down Mr Chairman and
members to line 16 through
25, and it's replaced with
requirement for a training
program of employees or
contractors involved in
investigating allegations of
offending conduct.
Counsel counseling healthcare
and reporting to launch to like
a page four.
Yeah, and we strike lines one
through 11.
Line 12.
Becomes implementing any
My handwriting is so terrible
Awareness prevention program,
including primary prevention,
bystander, intervention and risk
reduction.
Um, lines 14 through 17 or
really important component to
keep because they include
prevention strategies.
Lines. Um 18 becomes
Advise of policies consent. Just
want to appreciate these
amendments and the folks that
worked on them for really
holding onto the concept and the
necessity of the words
affirmative consent.
Striking lines 19 through 23
keeping lines 2425, which states
are included as party of every
incoming students, orientation
again, a really crucial
component, Mr Chairman and
senators because we're doing the
training component that the
chairman and I spoke about
On Page five.
Um, for purposes of this section
remains and again really
important, Mr Chairman and
senators leaving the definition
for affirmative consent means
affirmative conscious and
voluntary agreement to engage in
sexual activity. Striking lines
four through 23.
Keeping lines 24 through 25.
Moving to Page six.
Striking lines five through 10.
And
Wait that receives state funds
for already defined what a post
secondary
Educational institution is
there's no reason to have that
language in the law. So I had
originally struck that should
have been proposing that
amendment to the amendment.
Is everyone clear about that?
Is there any objection to that
amendment?
Sponsors, right. Got it. Right,
Mr. Chairman. We're okay with
that. Okay, good. It should have
been picked up in the amendment.
So and Mr Murtha sad to admit
that I have now memorized this
bill after being through it a
lot in the last 48 hours. So
along those lines, looking on
page six at that, that
definition that you're talking
about.
I
I guess my question is so you've
got all these different things
or otherwise organized in the
state that is legally authorized
to award a vocational or
technical certificate or degree.
Adam associate level or above
with a physical presence in the
state.
Um And I'm I'm wondering.
And it's just a question.
Whether well, that might be
instead of organized in the
state.
If we should have sympathy or
otherwise operating in this
state.
And then we could strike or
Are we can strike with the
physical presence in the state
where you are sure, six line one
instead of organized operating
Uh huh. Six Line four. We could
strike with a physical presence.
And now that might include
online programs.
And I don't know if you want to
exclude online programs.
Mr Chairman, Senator, We're okay
with that. Okay, so
Remaining the amendment. Yeah,
66 line. One instead of
organized would be operating
Striking, organized, inserting
operating, go ahead and then
online four striking where they
physical presence in this state.
So it actually expands their
definition of what our
What institutionalist.
So you're striking with a
physical presence in the state?
That is correct.
So online for inserting a period
afterward above afterward above
and striking the remainder line
four. Well, let me hold on
yourself. Second, actually, Miss
chairman, Let's Let's take those
one at a time. Let's let's first
do operating instead of
organized. Let's take that one
first if we could
One second line one change from
organized to operating
And I think we're all in
agreement on that one. We are Mr
Chairman, Senator OK, the
committee reports.
Yeah. So be
It's six line one strike
organized, insert operating
Emily.
In the bill.
Well in the in the amendment.
Well, yeah. In the building in
the bill, Page six line, one
strike organized.
Insert operating
All right. So let me help make
sure that Emily's caught up so
Right. That's that's what I'm
first of all. First of all 11
amendment we've already adopted
to the amendment.
And then hold on. Okay, center
is Were you still here? When we
did Page one
Line 22 minutes. No, it's in
you. It's a new Amendment
amendment. Do you have it?
There? You do have it. That's
what you have there. You've got
21. Okay, Good. All right. So
now we move beyond that two
risottos on Page six line one
correct.
Uh,
Amendment, where there would be
added to the list of amendments
that would on Russ Christ.
organized insert operating
And strike organized and start
in lieu operating
And then and then.
The question I have from the
scoop.
And and and, and her coalition
is whether or not it actually
makes sense to to strike with
the physical president.
It does chairman and senator
initially when you said it ain't
it would help us. Um, that
sounded positive. But I'm just
wondering if it is that I'm not
thinking of right. That's what
I'm thinking about two thinking
I'm thinking operating makes
sense but leaving with a
physical presence in the state.
I think up to this, you know, I
agree, okay.
So that would be it. So the only
the only matter before us right
now is on Page six line one
striking the word organized,
replacing that with operating
correct. Is there any objection
to that amendment?
Seeing none. That amendment is
adopted with the others.
So do you still have the floor?
I'm really good and I'm very
impressed, and I'm very
grateful.
Stewart, So I showed Brandon a
couple of other errors. She got
lettering. That's not right.
You've got punctuation. That's
not right.
At least in the mock up. I can't
tell if it's correct in the
amendments, Amendment alright
the next next proposed amendment
Senator Stewart Do you want to
make you want to tackle this
now? So, um
With Brandon's help members
would look at Page two of the
markup.
We have to read letter
That's great. Everyone
amendments fine.
The market is not accurate
there, but But there are many,
okay.
You should see my version.
And the notes. Edits.
Alright, so we don't need to do
anything further there.
Anyone else on the amendment now
as it's been amended, is there
any objection to adoption of the
amended Amendment?
Okay, Well, yes. Everything
we've covered right? So we'll
call that our amendment.
I'd love to put this out as a
committee sub, but we all know
we can't do that.
What we'll do for Senator
Stewart's concern. I think it's
a very legitimate concerns will
have to do we have to do a full
markup that really has the time
to show strike out and inserted
language. Um, but I assure you,
you'll find that harder to read
than this right now, just
because of the number of changes
that are made, But we're on the
We're on the building as amended
with the amendments any more
discussion.
Probably be a really nice way to
do it and we've done it before,
And I think that's probably the
best suggestion of all.
So essentially would be
striking.
Don't look so pain. Miss Coo,
It's we do it and it works and
it and it does you no harm it
will be readable.
So we'd be we'd be essentially
striking that
Housing bill.
And inserting in lieu thereof.
An amendment that recently
Mr Chairman and senators. I
appreciate your intent. Take
this back to the house
difference. Okay? Thank you,
sir. One other discussion.
That's good. Very good
Suggestion. Thank you
Think it'll will make it'll
It'll help us. Make sure that we
get all the grammar, right?
Thank you, sir. Mr.
Thank you, Senator. Center sort,
Mr. Chairman. Perhaps you can
run it by
Juliana Coupe first once we have
it, so that something doesn't
get exercised accidentally or
whatever. Absolutely no, we'll
do that, and we'll be careful to
make sure that if it you know,
we'll get the committee report
out and we'll read it and if
there's still a problem on the
floor will take care of it on
the floor or bring it back to
the commissioner. You We never
let anything out of here that
You don't look pretty. You don't
look convinced, but alright,
Wait a minute. We're on a do
pass motion. Do we have a new
path? Thank you. Is there any
objection?
Seeing none. You have a do pass
Senator. And don't you love
coming to this committee loving
it already? Thank you, Mr
Chairman and thank you for the
time you took it a minute recess
will be looking all the chair.
Maybe tomorrow morning. Please
be alert. Thank you.
I'm ready.
Did you get all of that?
All
Thank you guys.
