For Wednesday, so you may have
seen a version of the agenda
that showed them and that's the
reason I'm not here is their
East Coast time They're going to
have to appear by zoom so
coordinating all that put us,
put us offer earlier agenda. We
have only two bills today.
Senate Bill six. Well here,
we'll hear them in that order
and then Senate Bill 167. I'm
going to ask the committee
members to help me to work with
a six o'clock.
Uh, conclusion today 630 on the
outside. I'm hoping that we can
make that work. I know there are
a number of commitments this
evening members have spoken a
little bit with, um
Members to the leadership on
both sides regarding the way
that I hope to do things, which
is to put time limitations on
speakers, But I also realized
there is a need for free flowing
debate, and so my goal will be
to manage the clock and the
schedule.
What time limitations but also
recognizes that I will come back
to members at the time allows it
So, um, if I recognize you for
Five or 10 minutes. It doesn't
mean that I won't come back to
you if there's a continuing need
for debate, so with that said,
Senator Doing on Senate Bill six
World
Start with you and again
committee members giving you an
idea of
Our work plan for today. Six
o'clock stop!
Oh, I'm sorry. You know what
they're doing? Come. Sorry. Can
I have you set aside for just
one second, just one more minute
to the committee's indulgence
Want to recognize? Um, Mayor?
Could you just come for real
quick? I told you that I would
just ask you to take the chair
for just a couple minutes. I
just want to introduce Mayor
someone park, but they hear
constituent of mine. But also
important, I think on this
subject real quick. We heard him
in Las Cruces during the
interim.
Um, I like using you as an
example of
Maybe a lead into this next
subject. There are 32 planned
dispensaries or either license
or planned dispensaries and
someone park.
What's our populations on the
part, Mayor
So And I always ask you this
question put in context. How
many grocery stores we have its
own barred
You know, and how many bars or
liquor establishments we have.
So three bars, no grocery
stores, and we're on our way to
about 30. Mid 3030 something
dispensaries. Right? So, um,
real quick. Maybe you wanna tell
us what your grocery seats tax
just two minutes perspective on
What cannabis has done for all
of you know someone Park borders
the state of
Any other, um, thoughts you
think we should have before we
lead into a discussion on
cannabis
Many members any questions?
And welcome to Santa Fe. Thanks
for traveling with turns out to
be before 45 hours to be here
today, so
Mayor, Patio senators advanced.
I was the second youngest mayor,
but the first mayor Insulin park
was 23. I started at 24
Very good. Thank you, Mayor for
being here. All right there,
dude.
And committee members. What
we've got most of you here we
call center. Duke's taking her
seat. Please remember the keys.
Um, I think the commitment I
believe is at six o'clock 615.
And so I'm hoping all of you
have let Emily know for that, so
we can get a good head count. So
Senator Doig that said, it's all
yours. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
I'm drowned here by Todd
Stevens, who is the direct
regulation and licensing.
And Mr Chair Because this is a
long bill. I'm gonna try to as
quickly as I can just walk
through the sections of it and
point out what's significant. We
do not have any organized public
comment and support and so
Hopefully we will
I'm sorry. One second. We're
being told that there's not
audio for the Webcast. Just be
aware that Senator evidently
we're in front of you. We'll
keep checking on the audio.
Thank you for letting me know.
Sorry, Senator. No problem and
Mr Chair. I have two amendments
that I'm going to propose. Would
you like me to propose those as
we get to those sections in the
bill or go through the whole
bill first and then?
So, Mr Chair as you know, Well,
um
After we've legalized two years
ago. We're going through the
same process that all other
states that legalized cannabis
have gone through where we need
to see what's working and what's
not, and where there's
unintended consequences and
address those. And so this bill
is an effort to do that.
Um, section
The first section is, uh, deals
with an exception to the
inspection for, uh, the right to
the
I'm sorry, Mr Chair. I'm
tripping over my own tongue
today.
It's an exception to IBRA. What
we're finding right now is that
when folks are calling in to CCD
to say, Hey, I see someone not
following the rules or doing
something illegal.
Then that someone who has been
reported called CCD up and says,
who just reported me and they
have to tell them and that does
not create a environment that is
conducive to encouraging folks
to report bad actions that
they're seeing, so this would
create an exception just during
the investigation, too, for
those records, and then after
investigations finished, they
would become public records.
Ah, Section three. His
definitions.
And really the important
definition.
Other than a lot of this is just
clean up the important ones on
page 11, and that's the
definition of the illegal
cannabis product.
And that's going to be anything
that's produced from
manufactured outside of New
Mexico or produced manufactured,
distributed or sold in New
Mexico is someone who is not
licensed to do so.
Or, uh, any of those things
produced manufactured etcetera
by someone who is licensed. But
that action is outside of the
bounds of their life of their
license specifically does not
include home grow. And this this
definition Mr Chair is going to
become important, especially
when we talk about trafficking
later on.
Section four.
The important part of Section
four is on page 19.
There's a couple of important
parts of this one.
On page 19 we address when
someone has, uh, an alcohol
license, liquor license and a
cannabis license.
When we originally passed this
bill, the intention was that
those two things not be served
together.
But we went a little too far
with the language. We said you
can't even have those licenses
at the same time, the same
person.
So what we're doing here is
we're saying you can have both
licenses, but you still can't co
locate them on the same
premises. You still can't serve
them together because Mr Chair
the data shows that when folks
are consuming both of those
substances at the same time, the
fatality of accident skyrockets.
It's just too much of a public
safety risk. So then still in
Section four on page 23 is the
other important part of this
section.
This creates a mechanism for our
legacy. Medical cannabis
providers to convert from a
nonprofit to a C corporation
partnership, whatever, Um
because of a rule by the
Department of Health. All of
those folks were required.
To register as nonprofits, even
though they were not treated as
non profits by the I R. S. They
got none of the benefits of
being non profit. There was no
real reason for it. And now
they're stuck. Uh, so this gives
just those. It's 34 entities. I
believe a one time opportunity
to make that transition if
anything is pending against
them, and he lawsuits, any
debts, anything like that.
Those are not affected by the by
that transition.
Section five.
Narrows on page 24.
Narrows our water proving your
water rights requirement just to
those folks who are using water
to producers and micro
producers. There's no reason why
we should make anyone else
proved water rights when they're
not using water and that that
same the way that we were
concerned with initially,
including this requirements.
And on page 26.
This is an important part, Mr
Chair because this is really
laying out and expanding.
CCD is ability to refuse to
issue suspender revoke a
license for someone who
Either doesn't meet the
qualifications of licensure and
and there's indications that
these are not good players who
we want in our market.
So the things that would be
considered as a tax lane that's
related to cannabis activity in
another state or the state
pending investigation or felony
felony indictment or conviction.
And the reason Mr Chair that
we're talking about pending
things here. We're not talking
about only after you've been
convicted as situations like
with the guy Denali, who was
doing the human trafficking that
we've heard so much about.
His case I believe has been
pending.
For
How many for a long time in
federal court. We know this is
not a guy we want plain in our
market. Um, so even though there
has not been a conviction at
this point, we think it is
prudent that when in situations
like that, though, when
situations like that arise that
CCD have the ability to to keep
someone out of that mark our
market
And if you look on page 27,
there's more
Uh,
Items that CCD would look at,
including someone who has
You know a pending investigation
or indictment or conviction for
human trafficking for using
minors, Um to sell or transport
Canada or any other control or a
controlled substance? Um
Non compliance with the rules,
including local rules, and so if
someone just is not following
the rules, that is a really they
should not be able to continue
to have the privilege of a
license in New Mexico on that
one, though we don't want there
are some locals who are
adversarial to cannabis. And so
we have the CCD being the one
who's making the not just any
local who says you're not
falling.
Hmm. And
Moving to Section six.
This is criminal history.
Background checks. Now, Mr
Chair. We have sent this
language to the FBI.
Um, and asked them to let us
know if this is going to meet
their criteria for what they
need in order to do national
background checks. So far, we
have not heard back from them.
Probably if we haven't heard
back from them. By the time this
bill is headed into its next
committee, we're just going to
take this whole section out
because there's no point in this
passing something.
Ah, that will continue to not be
effective. We really need that
feedback from the FBI in order
to get the correct language for
that issue.
On Section seven.
On page 36.
We are taking out when I think
is corporate welfare, Mr Chair.
We said so.
Licensees have to pay plant
count fees.
Um, And here we said that
basically if you have paid
already $125,000 in licensing
fees, and that's all you're ever
going to pay.
That is a massive benefit to the
really big guys.
Who are not paying their fair
share. It gives them an unfair
competitive advantage over all
the everyone who is not a really
big guy, and my understanding is
there's actually only one entity
in the state who has ever taken
advantage of, uh, this welfare.
Um, and it's just it's it is not
necessary, and it's uh not fair
to everyone else.
Ah, on Section eight.
This is just dealing with
education and training. We had
previously tasked CCD with
licensing education programs
around cannabis. That is not
their job and not their
expertise. So now they will be
advised of educational programs
that are created by institutions
that do so, But they are not
responsible for licensing those
Section nine is
Dealing with on page 38. We want
to make sure that the
advertising of the of cannabis
products isn't doing stuff
that's going to appeal to
Children, which we already had
in there, But this is just
flushing that out a little bit
more. Uh and it also is
requiring that edible cannabis
products be in opaque packaging.
So that if a kid stumbles upon
I brownie and a package. They
don't see the brownie. They're
not tempted to take a bite of
it. Um
And it's limited to edible
products there because, frankly,
I don't think
My my, my 10 year old. If he
founds a brownie, he's gonna
want to eat it if he finds
A cartridge of oil or some
flour. I don't think he would
know what to do with it. We
don't have the same concerns
about that being appealing to
Children.
On section 10 is really just
clean up.
Section 11 is just moving the
definition of advertising
because that's the only place we
really use it.
Section. 12 is a very important
section and we're gonna have to
amendments to offer around that.
so this is defining trafficking.
Um, and says trafficking is
producing manufacturing
distributing Corinne Courier,
Oran or selling illegal cannabis
products.
And we want to make sure right
now we as we heard over the
interim multiple times, DPS
really is not
Pursuing, um, going after folks
who are trafficking illegal
cannabis. We have huge amounts
of cannabis being brought in
from other states. Uh, and right
now that the juice isn't worth
the squeeze for DPS to pursue
prosecutions of that.
And so we want to
Give that make it make the juice
worth the squeeze, so we are
increasing the penalties and I'm
gonna and we do it for both
miners and for
For adults and I want to talk
about miners first right now, if
you're a minor and you're caught
trafficking cannabis, The only
penalty is a four hour drug
course or four hours of
community service. What this
bill does is, it says any
penalty is provided in the
delinquency act, and then those
four hour things.
And the reason we went. That
approach was based on
discussions with Children's
court judges. I'm also on the
Children's Court Improvement
Commission, and I submitted the
Saddam and asked them.
Please let me know if you think
this is the wrong way to go
about it have not heard anything
back from them.
But
Part of the point of Children's
court. Mr Chair is to connect
those kids and families with the
services and resources that they
need to make sure that they're
not coming back in adult court
and having only this four hour
contact with them isn't nearly
enough to do that, so this would
give Children's Court judge's
discretion under the delinquency
act to respond to a particular
situation that comes before
them.
Where a minor has been is
trafficking.
For adults.
And this is gonna be different
in and I think I'll describe
what we're going to do with the,
uh, the amendments instead of
necessarily what you see here,
Mr Chair.
We want to make sure one that we
are not folks who if I
Buy a pre roll in Colorado and
drive across the border to New
Mexico. That is not the kind of
trafficking we are worried
about, So we're going to set a
minimum threshold they all see
in in these amendments, uh,
which corresponds to the maximum
amount that medical patients are
allowed to have it anyone
because they can have a 90 day
supply.
And then we are saying that if
for folks who are 21 and older
uh if you
Traffic of first time. That's
1/4 degree felony. Second and
subsequent is a third degree
felony. And also, the, UM
forfeit tracked also applies so
that truck that they're using to
Bus in all the cannabis from
Oklahoma, uh, would also be
subject to forfeiture under that
act.
And section 13.
Uh, is dealing with when
cannabis products have been
adulterated.
Uh, so Sunday are moldy or there
has been something they've been
You know, growing up process and
unsanitary conditions. We want
to make sure that CCD has the
ability
To control those and that
they're not that unsafe products
aren't getting out into our our
market. Same with section 14
that's dealing with misbranded.
So if someone if something is
misbranded, and it's false and
misleading to customers, um
there's also again we'll have
give the division the ability to
to step in.
And make sure that those
products aren't out floating
around.
Section 15 is also gonna be
addressed by an amendment. We
are striking all of section 15.
Mr Chair. Uh,
It's a little bit
unconstitutional. We need to
deal with CCD needs to have the
ability to to season embargo
illegal cannabis products
because what's happening now and
crush me if I'm wrong is
Someone goes out and doesn't
inspection. They see a whole
bunch of illegal stuff. They go
back to the office to do
whatever they need to do to
start dealing with that, and by
the time they get back, it's
gone. It's in the black market
already.
So they need the ability to
immediately put a hold on those
products or sees them when
appropriate, but
Uh, they need law enforcement
powers to do that. So we have a
stand alone bill that would give
them law enforcement powers and
lay out the procedure for that,
But we will not be doing that in
this bill.
And we're almost done. Mr.
Chair, I promise.
Ah section 1716 is just another
Ipra cleanup.
Based on what we did earlier
number 17. This was an
unintentional consequence of
When we took cannabis out of the
definition of controlled
substance in our statutes, that
means that meant it was no
longer um, contraband in our
jails in prisons, So we are
specifically adding that
And section 18 is adding
trafficking of cannabis to the
racketeering statute. This was
at the request of the governors.
Commission on organized crime.
Ah, nice felt that that would
give them more flexibility to
pursue.
Uh, trafficking.
Issues and section not 19.
Is just adding trafficking to
the delinquency act. Since we
have added that language for
minors and trafficking
Section, 20 is adding the
Cannabis Regulation Act to the
Uniform Licensing Act and
section 21.
Is repealing.
Uh uh, Plants are plants, so
right now we have plant count
limits. And when we pass that we
included a sunset.
This is repealing that sunset.
We are hearing from the industry
and and it's was reflected and
the mayor talking about the 30
some dispensaries and
And Sunland Park. We have a
flooded market taking away plant
counts while we're dealing with
a flooded market is a terrible
idea, um, that will do nothing
but continue to flood the market
and will again continue to only
benefit those really big guys
who are already positioned, uh,
to exceed the plant council
already. There's a whole lot of
people who
Who aren't even meeting their
plant counts now.
So, Mr Chair with that, if, uh,
Mr Stevens has anything to add
alternate over to him.
Thank you. Chairman. Committee
members. Um they're all DEA
sponsoring this bill as an arms,
the division with the tools
necessary today for the future.
This bill clears up some
unintended consequences of the
original bill and help support
law enforcement officers and
their criminal investigations in
regard to cannabis. Lastly, we
believe the bill will aid New
Mexico and becoming a more
mature market Conservatives as
we move more into the future.
Thank you Don't know if you'd
like me to move those the
amendments at this time.
All right.
The first one is, uh
And just 6698.1.
I don't know if it's been passed
out members.
And actually, if both could be
passed out to members.
Ending in
Hmm.
Mr Chair. You
You wait for me to proceed on
those? Okay? Sure. So this is
the one that's making sure that
someone just coming across the
border with with amount of
cannabis. That is not what we're
worried about when we're talking
about trafficking.
It isn't
Isn't caught out. Isn't felon
ized because of it, so this
would apply to the trafficking
section, and it would it
provides that trafficking
cannabis products applies only
to quantities that are more than
15 ounces of cannabis flower 120
G of concentrate or 6 G of
edibles or 24 cannabis plants.
And this is based on kind of the
maximum amount that someone can
legally have here in New Mexico.
If someone is exceeding that
maximum amount and and for for
these amounts that maximum
amount really is talking about
those medical patients for folks
who are not medical patients,
this would still be an excess of
certainly of the transaction
limit.
But we want to make sure that
we're not catching people up
unnecessarily with the
trafficking conviction when
The amount of cannabis that they
have just doesn't justify.
Oh, and I moved the amendment.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator Doing so I do. I
do. So I just wanna make sure I
understand this so basically
Someone could drive up to
Antonito, Colorado.
And purchased 14 ounces.
Bring him back, put them all
into three rolls and they're
distributing those and they're
they're they're not going to be
Trafficking.
So, Mr Chair, Senator. No if
they were to get those 14 ounces
in Colorado, bring them here,
Put them in pre rolls and
distribute them and they're not
licensed to do that, then they
would be trafficking.
Okay, good just simply for
possessing that amount would not
be trafficking can bring the
14 ounces back if you're using
it yourself, but it
You're still trafficking if it's
being distributed
If it's being produced
manufactured, which put it in
pre roll manufacturing
distributed or careered or sold.
And it would be great. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Yep. Yes, Um
I noticed it's 15 ounces, which
is nearly and then it goes on to
say 6 G of edibles. Is that
total weight or is that adjusted
weight?
So that would be and
Not see Brandon in here. But
that is that is the max so
medical patients can get a 90
day supply at a time. And so
that is the maximum amount that
a medical patient can can get at
one time. And so that's why we
picked those senator. I
understand that part but on
straight flower, you know
there's total weight.
That's what we're talking about.
6 G total weight of the product
or yes adjusted potency. And and
Mr Chair, Senator. Thank you. I
didn't understand the question
before. Yes, it's the total
weight.
Or higher concentration, more
product.
More, which is at a lower
concentration trafficking as
much
Cannabis product.
And Mr Chair, Senator, they
might not be trafficking as
strong of product, but they're
still trafficking as much the
same with flower flower has
different concentrations. And so
we're not sick. So we're saying
if you have 15 ounces of flour
period, whether it is 20% THC or
30% THC or 10% THC.
We're not gonna get into the
concentrations where we're just
dealing with the amounts of the
probably would be wise.
Alright.
I don't obviously don't know,
you know, but
Um
So remember when we carried the
you and I have senator, we carry
the original decriminalization
or you have ended up carrying
it, but I supported it.
Remember, we were talking about
how much of a gram was and him
and I were actually taken up
looking at photos and I get what
you're saying about 90
It's a duffel bag of weed. She
should strong stock.
Mr Chair, Senator. It is. It's a
lot of weed. I I agree with you
The only reason that we chose
this approach is because we
don't want cannabis or we don't
want medical patients who are
legally allowed to get that much
at once to be to be
inadvertently. Uh, Mr Chair,
Senator, we hadn't thought about
that. But
But I think if
I suspect CCTV would be open to
suggestions on this because it
is. It's a lot of weed.
So you literally could bring 24.
Alright. So, Mr Chair Senator
right now under our home grow if
you have at least two adults in
your household, you are allowed
to have 24 plants
So it doesn't matter how big
these things I know that because
they're genetically integrated
bigger.
Mr Kerry? Yes, that our our law
currently for the purposes of
home grow it just counts of
plants as a plant. It's not
about how much yield you would
get from it or what percentage
of THC concentration it has a
plant plant plant, even though
but you're right. They can
Hmm. Yes, mr Chair.
So subsection is defines what
trafficking is and then beat
limits That definition, I guess.
Is that right? Yes. I had
originally wanted to put that as
a sub 32 to that definition,
Janelle Mason in her infinite
wisdom, so I thought that it
should be its own separate
paragraph, and I don't know how
we do that elsewhere in the
statute.
I'm looking at the world where
the amendment would be in a
proposed amendment would be on
page 44 years. This will be a
new subsection subsection eight
defines what is
Limits.
I'm not. I'm not sure whether,
if legislative councils told you
that's the way we do in their
experience, I do share the
comments made earlier that
that's a lot of hot. Um
24 inches suggest that we're
overstate these days. You're not
in your
The
Suggestion 50.
Been a long time since I was in
college when Sarah Morris was
growing. Uh so what I do
remember what plants rooms and
Yeah, 5th 5th. Is anybody
playing with the expression of a
lid? My dating myself here, my
daddy myself a little bit. Okay,
So Stewart, really so my right
eyelid is roughly announced. Is
that right?
Okay. Ah, well, my understanding
is that the dope affects long
term and short term memory,
Senator Stewart, So, so like
you.
We We've with long term memory
loss is no doubt about it, but,
yeah, I'm just trying to get an
idea How much The quantity is.
It seems like quite a bit to me
as well, too. So I appreciate
what you're trying to say. Which
is that?
You're trying to make this
consistent with the idea of the
goals of the medicinal marijuana
heard. Some suggest that you
would maybe read word this in a
way that would limit this even
then.
I want I mean again. I
understand the logic behind
trying to compare that when
you're trying to come up with a
quantity, and I also respect the
fact you're not trying to just
pull this out of thin air coming
up with arbitrary quantities
That all makes good sense. And
that seems reasonable. But it
does seem like
24 practice matter. We're never
really going to
We never really gonna
You were saying it wouldn't be
legal to bring that back and
then start rolling it and
selling it. But we're never
gonna seems to me that we're
trying to seems the goal here is
to keep
Our wisest singer quantities. We
don't want that. That's our
goal. We really out of
quantities. So, Senator episode
Our wisest singer quantities. We
don't want that. That's our
goal. We really out of
quantities. So, Senator, I've
Our wisest singer quantities. We
don't want that. That's our
goal. We really out of
quantities. So, Senator Episode
I'm sorry, Mr Chair before we
had come to these numbers we had
been kicking around four times
the transaction limit, which
would be eight ounces of flour
64 G of concentrate.
And 3.2. G of edibles. Um so I
think we couldn't take
Couple approaches, one might be
to say for medical patients.
It's this higher amount and for
anyone who's non medical
patient. It's these lower
amounts. Uh or we could just say
these lower amounts for
everyone.
Yeah, I think that's what you
heard me saying is my preference
Senators.
Limit on that and supported the
medicinal mineral state of our
goal is to keep this from Mr
Chair. Mr. Stevens was saying
the other night. Medical
patients can traffic too. So
it's uh so I would I would be
open to amending the amendment
to these lower amounts. That's
the will of the committee.
Let's hear from everyone who's
just real quick. This you
remember. Well, that would be
for Mr Chair four times the
amount that they're allowed to
buy of edibles at one time with
your existing amendment, or no,
No, no with the checks are with
if yes, with the existing
amendment. No, no, that's way
more than four times. I'm sorry.
The 3.2 G would be four times.
The transaction limit Now for
ever. You're talking about an
amendment to your amendment.
Right? So this is you presented
this amendment as you presented
Eight times around eight times
the transaction limit. All
right, Senator Risotto. You were
next breakfast German, So I'm
trying to
Wrap my head around this as a
preacher's kid.
Unlike everybody else, I didn't
have a closet full of this stuff
in college.
Uh so I'm not sure what the
amounts are, but
The
The, uh
Um what I'm so so part of what
I'm trying to understand,
though.
Before we even deal with the
amounts that we're talking about
here.
It is.
So
Is we're dealing with the
definition of illegal
Cannabis products.
Is where we start interest
trafficking. Is that correct?
Right? Mr. Mr Chair, Senator you
need to do you really have to
read this section in conjunction
with that definition of illegal
cannabis products, which is on
page 11 and the Mr Chairman and
and
Etcetera.
First of all where, where else
in the bill.
Is illegal Cannabis product.
Relevant other than this
section.
Mr Chair, Senator off the top of
my head without doing a word
search. My computer is up there.
I couldn't tell you but it
But it is it is one of the
defining illegal cannabis is one
of the most critical parts of
this bill and Mr Chairman,
etcetera. I understand that it's
If it's if it's if it's not used
in multiple sections of law. It
should. Perhaps the
Done entirely within the one
section of law and Mr Chair
Senator. It is used in multiple
sections. Okay, so that's that's
why we moved like the
advertising definition just to
its own advertising section, as
opposed to the general
definitions because it was only
used there, but this is used
throughout the Cannabis
Regulation Act in the general
definitions, the term Mr
Chairman and senator the term
illegal cannabis product is
used.
Yes. Okay. Very good. So then so
then So then I guess my
My next
Question on that, though, is
Is the applicability amounts.
Are these amounts and only
applicable
Two.
To trafficking or these amounts
applicable generally to illegal
cannabis.
Products. Mr Chairman, Mr.
Chair, Senator. They're only um
okay, because also, as I mean,
what are things
Looking at the definition of
illegal cannabis product. I'll
just say that
Right is that we have product.
That is produced or manufactured
outside New Mexico.
But
But that's just it in and of
itself, Mr Man.
Etcetera. I don't I don't
believe all products produced or
manufactured outside New Mexico
by definition.
Is it illegal cannabis products?
Hmm. Mr Chair, Senator. Yes, we
specifically say in the Canada's
regulation Act that you we know
cannabis can be from outside the
state. So much like federal law.
Uh, the only legal canvas
products are those that are
produced, manufactured
distributed within New Mexico,
and they have to to start in New
Mexico.
Mr Chairman.
Etcetera. That's certainly for
for sale in New Mexico.
No. Mr Chair, Senator. No,
that's for all cannabis products
in New Mexico. They have to
originate here.
And and and stay here to be
illegal.
And yet, Mr Chairman and
Senator. Part of what we're
talking about right now is what
is the threshold by which I can
go to Colorado or Oklahoma or
someplace else and have a
sufficient personal stash that
that is not considered to be
trafficking.
Right, Mr Chair, Senator. So
we're saying that small amount
wouldn't be trafficking. It's
still illegal. I mean, that is
still illegal cannabis that
would be coming over the borders
were just saying that that would
not raise the level of
trafficking illegal cannabis if
it was the smaller amounts,
okay, and and and and just real
quick, so that I understand the
context. Then what is the
penalty then for having the
lower amount if I bring it back?
That is not traffic, Mr. Mr.
Oh, Mr Chair, Senator. It's a
misdemeanor.
Okay? And and and is that in
this
Mr Chairman, is that in this
bill?
It's in the current act, Okay,
but it's it's not amended in
this bill.
Okay. And so the, um
But there was chairman and
senator That means that we're
using a different term, not
illegal cannabis product
Chairman Senator Kevin Graham
from the general counsel for the
regulation licensing department.
Um, we used from possession for
illegal possession is a separate
crime. Um, under current law,
and that is part of why we're
looking at this trafficking
offense.
Working with law enforcement,
colleagues and others. We What
we're hearing is that under the
current penalties, it's simply
It isn't just doesn't justify
their time.
To to work on trying to
prosecute those cases, a real
investigate those cases and it's
not our desire to go after as
we've discussed, you know the
person who has a joint or to
really looking for the folks who
are out there intentionally
breaking the law, bringing in
product in quantities there is,
you know, causing a real
problem.
Um And so we tried to hit the
balance here, and I think the L
D we would certainly be in
support of any reasonable
threshold that you want to sit
there for this new crime of
trafficking.
But we recognize that there's
probably a justification for
having some threshold level or
amount for wind trafficking
would apply, and it wouldn't
apply to just anybody who
Maybe brought a joint across the
border.
Right? And and so and I
understand that, but but the
Miss chairman and, uh, etcetera
Council, But if I bring a couple
joints across the border,
though, that's a misdemeanor.
Uh, Mr Chairman, Senator? Yes.
Okay. And what have changed that
we're not. We're not changing
them this act but we also don't
call it an illegal cannabis
product in the south and and Mr
Chair Senator. That's because
you could have illegal
possession of legal or illegal
cannabis.
So you could have cannabis that
is legal, but it is illegal for
you to possess that, given the
circumstances.
Of
Your possession. Okay, so then
going back to the going back
into the
Uh,
Going back to into this
Uh,
Amendment that we have at hand,
then.
Is
Um
So really, what? We're really
what we're trying to do with
right now is what is the what is
the appropriate amount that
someone should be about allowed
to bring without it Being
trafficking? Is that correct?
Mr Chair, Senator? Yes.
Yeah, clearly.
I mean, just I would just simply
indicate that I really think it
ought to be much lower amount
than what we have here and
really it ought to be twice.
What a
What a person can a non medical
patients and lawfully by
Ah!
Because
Because if you're not a medical
patient,
Then you shouldn't have that
much anyway. Our medical
patient, you should be getting
it into Mexico.
So then why do you have it? If
you're coming into New Mexico
with that?
Uh, I will. I will also note,
though, that, uh
No, it was this travel, so I I
would, I would argue, Senator
Hurdle and simple.
Mr Chair. Are you done? Senator
Ready, Soto.
Um so
First the the Oklahoma question
can What's going on with
Oklahoma? Is it coming from
there? Or is it going to there?
Mr Chair, Senator. It's coming
from Oklahoma into Douma.
Mr Chair and Senator. How do we
know that?
How do we know that it's coming
from there?
And Mr Chair. I think Mr Stevens
can probably tell you about some
of his experiences and what he's
been seen.
Chairman, Senators Senator, uh,
based on our investigations
through bio track, um, the
oversaturation in Oklahoma.
We're seeing these come in, be
in facilities and not within the
seed to sale Tracing, which
leads us to believe that it's
coming from outside doesn't have
the new Mexico packaging Um and
Oklahoma with their
oversaturation and how close it
is, would be. What we're finding
is the likely culprit.
And Mr Chair. So you're you're
basing this off of seeds?
See Tracing is what you said. I
thought. Excuse me, Chairman.
Uh, Senator the seed to sale
tracing system that everything
goes through. So, um, we have a
online system, or, um, that
tracks everything from its
infancy. Um, all the way to sail
when I go into a location of my
officers going to a location in
that product is not in that
system logged. We know it came
from outside of New Mexico.
Or from the illicit market and
based on our investigations that
leads back to Oklahoma.
I see or Mr Cherry. It couldn't
possibly be somebody be somebody
that's growing illegal growing
at home.
This same stuff. It seems like
they could do that. And Mr Chair
Senator if they were doing that
and then selling it without a
license that would still be
illegal.
So, so anything that is not
within that tracking system that
seed to sale tracking system is
not something that is illegal
product in New Mexico because by
virtue of not being in that
system
That it's not. It's not working
within the required regulations,
but Mr Chair and Senator that
doesn't make the product illegal
in and of itself, does it If
you've done this, and you have
the notion that came from
Oklahoma
Um, I would think that you need
a higher level of proof, too.
To show that and Mr Chair,
Senator, if you look back at how
we're defining illegal cannabis
here, it would be anyone who is
producing manufacturing selling
outside without a license or
outside the bounds of their
license.
That would be defined as a legal
cannabis under this bill.
So, Mr Chair and Senator, I fail
to see you know, I have the same
issue Everybody has with the
amount for one, but I fail to
see how this is really gonna be
effective. So, um, you stop me
or somebody else. Mr Charron,
Senator on the road and I have
14 ounces of cannabis.
Um on me, Um and I am on this
side of the border. And so I I
Nefariously tell you Hey, I grew
it at home. This 14 ounces, but
I just bought it actually just
bought it in Colorado. What can
you do about that doesn't seem
like he could do anything at all
about that.
Mhm, Mr. Chair, Senator. I think
it's always going to depend on
the circumstances of the case
and what evidence is available
to the law enforcement officer
who is dealing with that, just
as it wouldn't in any other
case? No, I think I think that
that Mr Chairman, Senator that
this is much different. I think
short of an all out confession
by somebody coming over the
border and saying, Yeah, I just
came over the border from
Colorado, Oklahoma, wherever
And I bought it there and you
have more. You have an amount.
That's uh, above this or I just
don't understand how you connect
those dots. Dots, I guess so we
can have a discussion of
lowering the amount. I mean, I
would probably support that. I
just don't see the effectiveness
of creating this crime in
general, I I don't see how it's
prosecutable. I guess The other
thing that bothers me too, is
the cannabis.
So the other thing we haven't
focused on is this 120 g of
concentrate, concentrated to
what
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator,
concentrate is usually an oil
that is derived from the
cannabis plant. And then, uh,
People connected to a battery
pen and it's vaporized, and it's
smoked like like a Vape.
I would think Mr Chair and
Senator, though, that you know
you can have concentrates of and
I'll just make a number of 10
parts per million or 1000 parts
per million and you can have
that in the same 120 G of
concentrate. I would think so. I
I don't know. I don't know why.
You know that. It seems it seems
like it makes more sense to
To use a more quantifiable
amount than than just
concentrate. You know what kind?
I mean similar to to you.
Defining what 15 ounces is? We
have 20 g but in none of these,
we We don't have any sort of
concentration of T THC in it
that limits how concentrated or
how potent these products could
be.
And Mr Chair Senator so so
concentrate as a term of art
within cannabis. It's not
talking about how concentrated
THC s. It is a term to describe
a particular form of cannabis.
Uh, that is either an oil
Sometimes it's a wax. Um, and so
that's what concentrate means It
doesn't mean the concentration.
Of THC the problem with basing
regulations around the
concentration of THC on things
is that you're going to have to
have testing of every product
before. You know, if anything is
going to meet these thresholds
because products all the
products have different
concentrations.
Of THC in them. Yeah. Thank you,
Mr Chair in center. You're
making my point for me. I mean
that. That's exactly the issue
is that we don't know how much
this person has, because we
don't know the concentration, so
it's difficult to them as it may
seem to do that, Um, I would
think that would be the right
way to do it because then we
know how much they actually
have, because like I said, you
could have 120 G of concentrate.
Concentrate with a low
concentration or the same 120 G
of concentrate.
With a high concentration and so
I just I don't I don't see how
that makes sense. But I would I
would support the amount. I mean
that that's just leave it at
that. Thank you, Pearl back to
you, then Senator Morris than
Senator, Do you have a question?
It does include 24. Cannabis
Plant. Chairman, Senator, I
don't have that information with
me right now, but I can get you
an answer.
Mr Chairman, Senator, I wouldn't
want to speculate, but we could
use that number.
I think you know where I'm going
with this. So if you if you pull
it off, trim it.
Do all the work to it. You can
have 15.
Throw it in the back of your
brothers and stamps.
And Mr Chair Senator That's true
for home grow folks now who have
at least two adults in their
household 24 plants as long as
you uproot them from the place
and roots intact.
Throw him in the back of your
truck. Now you can possess up, I
think.
There's a little issue there
with how that's written. You may
just want to eliminate it
completely.
Um, just because we do identify
on page 11 that illegal cannabis
products which I have heartache
Think
Amount
And Mr Chair, Senator. We are
open to amendments to this
amendment, but I will say on the
idea of using THC concentration
as a basis
We don't treat other illegal
products that way. We don't say
we don't say how strong is the
fentanyl?
And that's how we determine if
it's illegal or not. We are the
cocaine or anything else we say
if it's an illegal product, it's
an illegal product and we we
treated that way. So we're
talking specifically about
illegal products here. Uh, so I
don't think it makes much sense
to
Create a carve out for
concentrations of
How strong the drug is for one
illegal product when we don't
take that approach on
That
Limit of the but to say cocaine.
Let's legally we're trying to
Carvell. Are we saying
regardless of its form, is it in
a
Oil that can be vaporized
through a pin adjusted or what?
And Mr Chair, Senator, I think
just like how cocaine is
illegal, no matter what illegal
cannabis is illegal, no matter
what. We're not talking about
what level it is to make it
illegal. We're talking about
what level is to make it
trafficking of illegal cannabis.
And so so
But that's because Mr Chair
because illegal cannabis is
illegal. Cannabis is illegal
cannabis, So whether whether you
have weak illegal cannabis or
strong illegal cannabis is
illegal, Regardless
what is more of 6 G.
Mr Chair and senator. It's not
about the percentage of these
amounts it's about. So just like
when cocaine is cut with
something out with baby pimp.
Blacks, whatever Whatever we
don't then say we're only going
to count their weight of the
cocaine that's actually pure in
that amount. As illegal we
count. The whole thing is
illegal and and the whole
amount. Uh, it's not about the
relative strength of it. It's
about its existence as an
illegal product. So when they're
whenever people are trying think
that's what I'm trying to focus
important.
Because if you're setting up in
there
That's why I was asking
The ability to test it, so I
think we have to get shin or
won't get in trouble where
someone could have 7 G out of
10% did just want to bring up.
I've heard
Um, we're talking about there,
so I'm trying to process
How that's possible.
Mr Chair, senator. One of the
reasons we do have a super
saturated market is because of
all the outside illegal cannabis
that is coming into our markets.
That's That's one of the main
reasons that we are saturated.
It's like it's not just a
surplus of legal cannabis. It is
a surplus created by a
combination of unlimited
licensure, frankly and illegal
cannabis coming into the state.
It's both
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Stuart.
Thank you, Mr Chair Changed
correctly, Um
Thank you for I noticed. I
noticed quickly on
My question could pop into my
head. No matter what the level
is, it's still federally crime
to transport any amount of Mr
Chair. Senator. Yes.
In this guy. I guess this
question to you is is the D a
just completely out of the
marijuana business. Now, I mean,
If you're attacking this large
quantities you're talking about
interstate trafficking of Roma
as a D A just said we're out and
they're not even worried about
what's going between states and,
uh, they've thrown their hands
up between what states are
doing. But are they not
regulating what's going back
between states anymore?
Chairman, Senator, Um they have
just not taken a stance and
giving guidance. Um So, um,
we're still waiting on that. Um,
but they just have not given
guidance yet on that.
And Mr Chair, Senator, if I may
I believe that the DOJ has said,
if you have an appropriately
strong regulatory system with a
deer state, and we're not going
to come in and kind of mess with
it, Uh and they lay out a couple
different criteria for what they
would consider appropriately
strong and so one of the things
we're trying to do in this bill
is create that appropriately
strong regulatory
But so they don't care. So the
federal Karen between dates are
doing it. So my question is,
once the feds do these federal
issue, Mr Chair, Senator? Yes,
when, if and when That happens,
we would definitely need to
revisit our statutes. Thank you
very much, Mr Chairman, So
sometimes it takes a moment at
the answering the questions and
the whole crew had earlier.
Was very helpful.
Because what we're
Because we're talking about here
is the level at which we go from
a misdemeanor to offender in
that regard, actually.
I think you've got the levels. I
think you got the levels right?
Because
What we don't but we don't want
is we don't wanna put law
enforcement of trying to figure
out if someone has a medical
license, given the month that
they have
The person with the medical
license.
Is
Is transporting for the purpose
of
Their own medical license or or
for some other purpose or this
or that or and and certainly I
guess we don't want to create a
Uh, and army of
People with medical licenses
were actually doing the
The
The trafficking.
Because they can carry higher
amounts.
I think this is actually as I as
I contemplated this what I
Took a stroll after my my
questions I realized no,
actually right and sold under
this. It's a misdemeanor over
this. It's a felony.
But but if you don't have a
medical license, and you're
moving this amount
It's still a misdemeanor.
Right. You're just not putting
someone in risk of a felony.
And so I mean, I tend to agree
with with Senator Portals point
about removing the 24 plants. I
don't know how many people have
to transport their plants with
them.
All the time.
Right, but other than the plants
Uh, right. Which easily enough
is done, right? We've just put
in or before the 6 G of edibles
in the strike. Ward 24 cannabis.
Plans. But outside of that,
actually, as high as this is
Um, and the life of me, I don't
know how our former colleague
makes it through the day at this
level. But as high as this is
Uh huh.
Uh,
yeah, this is this is I think I
think as a as a dividing line
Between what a misdemeanor and
what's a felony and what people
are bringing into the state.
To resell or to do business or
to do other things. This is
actually the right level.
Uh, it took some processing to
get to that. But I think this is
actually if we removed the
plants, I think there's there's
actually the right level.
And Mr Chair, Senator, I think
that removing the plants would
be a friendly amendment. So, uh,
Mr Chairman, if it it would be
appropriate unless the total
wants to that It was his idea,
but otherwise, if we're at that
point yet we're still
discussing. I know Senator
Stewart's on the list.
I don't want to jump the line.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, This is made me really
Ah, When this bill first came
over, you'll probably recall
that there were two instances
where people when buying
cannabis had to buy at least two
ounces. Remember that expression
on the
Sponsors face when we pointed
out with their bill actually
said they were shocked the first
time I had left the whole
session, and you commented about
it because I could not stop
laughing.
So you know, I I agree. This
seems like too much, but
I agree that what they've what
they're using is what's already
in the bill.
And because it's ramps it up. I
think we should leave what's
already in the bill, you are
allowed to have this. If you are
a medical cannabis user, I doubt
anybody ever does this I mean, I
think it's kind of insane. We've
made this so large, but that's
what the bill is. And unless we
change the statute
I'm fine with this the way it
is, Um, I think
The bar should be high for
felony so and I think that's
what they put in here, so I
don't have any property.
comment. This is a state agency
bill.
Yeah, they've agreed to an
amendment because you know,
we're so difficult spent an hour
and we're on the First
Amendment. That's the easy one.
So you know, they're just trying
to say Get me out of here. I
like it pretty in the statute.
There you go. Thank you,
President. So you agree 100%
with Senator risotto.
Ah, no, Mr Chairman, he wants to
take out the plants and I don't
think we should touch it. But I
just mentioned the reason they
want to move on is because they
want to move on was a tease. But
your observation is accurate.
which is I didn't think this
would be the easy amendment and
I just the first of what I
expect. Maybe long discussions
have already
Advice. There was just be
patient. Enjoy your time here,
Center Woods. Ah. So, sir Street
your last one on my list. Others
center every sort of know what's
going to propose an amendment.
Ready to hear anybody else
before we go back to that. So
service Soto, you have an
amendment. Perhaps I do. Uh, Mr
Chairman, the amendment would be
Ah, and, uh and and this
amendment, it would be
After the word concentrate.
Strike the comma, insert the
word or
After the word edibles, insert a
period and, uh
Strike everything else before
the
Over here. Sure.
After the word concentrate.
Strike the comma, insert the
word or
After the word edibles.
Just strike strike the rest of
the text to the to the period.
The effect is to eliminate the
24.
Cannabis plants exception.
We're on that amendment was
correct.
Committee members, please. Just
not no
It's okay.
I didn't. I didn't. I didn't
know that anybody was actually
on where we're at. So there's a
quick amendment. Is there any
objection to that amendment?
That's simple.
All others voting in support of
that amendment. Anything else on
this proposed amendment before
we
We're on the before me.
Any further discussion on that.
Is there any objection the
adoption of that amendment that
amendments adopted as amended
Senator Doig, your other
amendments. 698.11 Yes, Senator
or Mr Chair. So this is
Seeking to strike more of a
balance on those increased
penalties. Uh and then also
striking that section 15
altogether. That's the easy
part. That's number six on the
amendment. That's just getting
rid of that seizure. An embargo
section completely because we're
gonna We're addressing that in a
separate stand alone, Bill
The rest of what this does is if
you look at page 45
Right now. We have it that the
first time you traffic, fourth
degree felony, second time third
degree felony, third and
subsequent second degree felony.
Secondary felony is really high
for this kind of a thing. So we
are
Instead saying first time you do
it, it's fourth degree felony
and then second and subsequent.
It's a third degree felony.
And then we are
Just taking out this other
language.
About the convenience used or
intended to be used for the
purpose of trafficking. The
Tim's case this is this is
language that's in our alcohol
statutes, but it was put in
there prior to the Tim's case,
Uh, which
Found some issues with how we
were using the forfeiture act.
And so this now, it will just
say that the provisions of the
forfeiture act apply.
Which spring Frankly, Mr Chair
if you wanted to strike that
line could because I think
that's true. Whether we say it
or not. We really just left that
in there.
Kind of as a reminder so that
when our law enforcement is
looking to these statutes and
seeing what possible penalties
there might be that that
That that's a reminder to them.
So if I may, just for
clarification centers to the
The effect of the changes on
eliminate any graduated Mr
Chairs to eliminate the
graduated penalty to a second
degree felony, but not to a
third degree felony. All right.
Um and and the first paragraph
of the man correspond with what
you're doing in paragraphs.
Forfeiture or the seizure and
embargo section. Yes, Mr Chair.
Alright on this proposed
amendment question this so this
does leave in the forfeiture
provisions and still
Mr Chair, Senator. Yes and and
that that would apply,
Regardless, Um
Mr Chair. Why? Why would that
apply? Regardless, you're saying
that Even if you didn't state it
here it would still apply.
Mr Chair, Senator. That's my
understanding, but we thought it
might be useful to keep that
language in just two pink folks
when they're
When they're faced with
Cases when we're talking about
four forfeiture, Mr Chair and
senator we're talking about like
a vehicle. Right? So you're
You're carrying a pound of weed
and take your truck away. That
kind of thing, Mr Chairman,
Senator, So, Mr Chair, Senator,
So, yeah. So the big trucks that
are used to truck in large
amounts of illegal cannabis that
could or the, uh, profits that
are made from selling illegal
cannabis? Uh, those were
Mr Chairman, Senator, I guess to
me what comes to mind? And I
think that most of the people
that are going to get
Here on this or probably going
to be smaller. I would think I
don't know.
So I worry a little bit about
that, to be honest.
For the person that gets. I wish
there was tiered in some way, Mr
Chairman, Senator, So if you
catch the guy
You know, running an 18 Wheeler?
Packed
Um, that's different to me In my
mind and a person who, um, they
haven't They have 16 ounces
instead of 15 ounces. And so
anyway, just that's all I have.
Center Morrison Center brutal,
Mr. Thank you, Senator. So this
is only for those 18 and above
Correct, 21. I'm sorry not for
18 Get back to the bill. I just
wanted to talk about that issue.
What is? What is the penalty?
What are we talking about?
Um Oh, gosh, Mr Chair I It's six
years versus nine. I believe.
Yeah, I have to go through all
those other steps of the
question Well, and so second
offense, the current statute you
would have no under the current
statute. Mr. Chair, Senator,
you're never gonna degree is
three and second.
Yes, he knows where far better
than I do, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that, Um okay and
just being on the forfeiture. We
lost that big lawsuit. What? 10
years and I remember carrying a
forfeiture law my freshman year
and halfway through the aid of
it, Um, it was, um
But how does that track with?
so? So, Mr Chair, Senator,
That's why we took out this
extra language We had around.
forfeiture, um, was in response
to that was the TIMS lawsuit.
Ah, you're referring to the
Tim's right? Right? But but
again, the forfeiture act would
apply to this. Whether we say it
or not, That's we're not create.
We're not making it apply by
virtue of saying it here in this
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, ma'am
Pickup truck.
Mr Chair senator is going to
depend on the circumstances and
the analysis that is done
according to the forfeiture.
I think the forfeiture act would
apply. That doesn't mean that
that's just the analysis that
that that the court would go
through. It's the
It doesn't mean that it is a
foregone conclusion that that
truck would be seized would
require Mr Chair and senator
right?
Mr Turn? No, no. So if so that
The profits that you make from
the illegal action could be
subject to forfeiture, but you
would not have to purchase a
conveyance with problems like
ill gotten games in order for it
to apply, and and I'll note Mr
Chair. The Forfeiture Act
applies now under our current if
we made no changes to the
section whatsoever
That would not change anything
about the application of the
forfeiture act to trafficking of
cannabis.
Correct, Mr. Chair, Senator.
That is not the approach we take
for other stuff. So, for
example, if you have a liquor
license, and you have a bunch of
liquor that is not on your
manifests, and you're not
allowed to have under those
statutes.
The forfeiture act applies just
period. We don't we don't take.
I think Harvey, now a graduated
approach just for cannabis would
make our approach their
inconsistent with how we
Got a little help from that one.
I think everybody did. But
Yes.
So I was just going through the
forfeiture act. And actually, I
think I'm pretty comfortable
with it. I mean, pretty much
they would have had to have
bought the truck. From what I'm
reading here that they're
transferring the weed in by
having dosage from that.
Title. With that, however, I
think I think if if it doesn't
need to be there, we should
probably
And Mr Chair, Senator.
I think we are probably agnostic
on that. It was really left in
there just to make sure to ping
prosecutors and law enforcement
to to to think about that aspect
of it, Uh, not because it's
necessary language in order for
the forfeiture act to apply.
Sorry if I may.
Prior to me with your l D. Most
of my career was as prosecutor.
my legal career also been in law
enforcement career. I don't
pretend to speak on behalf of
all those folks.
But I do know that since being
an R l D past I've had a number
of discussions with law
enforcement folks there are is
So, um
Sentiment against towards the
idea of you legalized this. It's
yours to take care of now.
Um, that's not everyone.
colleagues of state police here
who worked hard to try to
enforce the laws.
But we were trying to leave in a
little message there that hey,
we We do still recognize that
there's criminal activity. We
still do want you to be after
the criminals in this field, and
here's a reminder. You know, our
forfeiture act is is not
utilized anywhere near as much
as it used to be. 10 years ago,
it is a pretty narrow forfeiture
act. I think Senator Baca
probably just saw that looking
at it.
Um, but we do want to know for
those folks who are running the
semis material over here and not
just from Oklahoma. But we do
want to make sure that we are
sending a message that we're not
tolerating.
Nothing further. Thank you. And
Hmm. Mr Chair.
Yeah.
Hmm.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um a lot of my
questions and comments want to
make sure I clarified the
advertisement We took
Um, we talked about the out of
state, and we had
I was piqued my interest on page
27 9 people without convictions,
um from playing, and you refer
to a specific case, But usually
in this committee, we've always
been really careful about for
due process.
And this would be a step from
what our tradition has been.
So how many square hour In the
past? We have not wanted to do
that.
So, Mr Chair Senator, because
all of this will also works in
conjunction with the Uniform
Licensing Act or the due process
is provided by that act would
still kick in, so it's still
have to go to a hearing. There's
still be an opportunity to be
heard an opportunity to appeal
All of that due process is built
in built in there, Okay. Thank
you for clarifying tanks, so
we're still still have to go
through the board.
Just as if they were a dentist
or a doctor. They would still
have that due process and they
could appeal it to district
Court.
Mm hmm. Yes, Mr Chair, Senator,
And it's not a board. It would
go to a hearing officer. But
yes, I was using the example
Since you were rld. What they do
with some of the other ones.
Okay. Thank you for that answer.
Um, on page 38. I like what
you're doing with the package
carried, um
The state of, uh, one of things
that concerned first off What is
color way?
You know, Mr Chair, Senator,
That's a good question. Uh, I
think that is kind of a term of
art. And in talking about
marketing, um
Aspect different aspects of
marketing something and so I
assume that it is the color
scheme that is used in the in
the marketing.
Buy Google it right now.
In in the the thing I think is
missing this
His taste one of the things that
they've done in other states is
the sugar contents and
everything else to make it. I
even used the example of maybe
we could even mandate or by
rulers, putting bidders
something that was bitter so
that they had as soon as they
took one of them. They wouldn't
want another one with sugar and
making it taste yummy. So that
way, if a kid ever had it would
be like I don't like it, but an
adult is willing to have a
little bit of a sour, bitter
taste and
Me to get that effective. What
would you find out? What color
way is? I don't know what that
means. But what would you think
about adding something in there
about taste that mimics, you
know, gummy bears products that
is actually intended to not only
look like those which I think
you're addressing here. I'm
assuming color would And so, Mr
Chair, Senator Color way is a
scheme of two or more colors in
which in which a design is
available.
It is often used to describe
variegated or ombre shades of
one color, print yarns, fabric
or threat, So it's
I'm not sure exactly. I can't
think of the top of my head of
what I color way that that meant
that appeal is marketed Children
might be, but But as far as
taste and and and I will note
that we already require that all
packaging has to be child
resistant.
So we're that's already a
requirement. Um, and one of the
reasons that we're making those
packages for those for edible
products opaque is so the kids
aren't seeing it and aren't
tempted by what they see. I
think I think it might would
probably
I don't think it would be a
reasonable requirements say it
has to taste terrible because
basically then you're telling
everyone I mean, you're
Who's gonna buy the terrible
tasting product here, is it? Not
true? I agree with that part. I
mean, yeah, but I'm not saying
that has to taste like something
from Harry Potter but something
that solace loaded with sugar.
I'm gonna use the example that
happened on Sunday. Um, after
we're coming back from a party
our 11 month old got ahold of
the baby Tylenol and actually
got the top drank. We're
figuring out about half full at
that time I call poison control
and that stuff is yummy. I think
most of it ended up on his
shirt.
Call poison control and they
walk me through writing. You
ended up being a right
But even though the patent came
and traveled up on it, he was
still able to figure it out or
well enough like we should have.
And so just having childproof
packaging drink, potentially
half bottle of the little baby
Tylenol taste delicious. He
would have stopped in those
things. They loaded with sugar,
So it tastes good. So you can
actually give it to the kid
because that's what it is. So I
I think somehow, either through
regulation or something, we have
to make it not so appetizing
that they think it's a bag of
Skittles because it's easy
enough to get these things open.
Someone has high and they leave
it open.
They're going to get in there
and eat a bunch of it, So I
think we should come up as you
move forward with this some kind
of
Rulemaking power for these guys
over there to come up with
something that for kids because
I think that's what they're
doing to taste not
intentionally, but I think
Kid gets into it and chocolate
and it's yummy, you know, kind
of the difference between dark
chocolate and milk chocolate or
that's probably individual. I'm
talking about Children for
Children.
Mr Chair, Senator. My 10 Year
old loves dark chocolate. He
loves black licorice. He loves a
bunch of stuff that I think
tastes absolutely awful. So But
but But I hear what you're
saying. We want to do everything
we can to keep these products
out of the hands of and that was
my point. Is you look forward to
and I'm not gonna propose and
member because I don't know how
to do it, But I would like these
guys to have the power.
To at least look at it as
something they decided to do,
and they think it could help
prevent, um, accidental
overdoses of Children. I would
like them to have the power to
at least look at that sort of as
you move forward if you could
come up with something that they
could do, and I see you the
council last night in his head a
little bit. Maybe strike shaping
probably want that would be an
option that they then the future
legislatures can save them.
Why haven't you done this or
give us a reason why you haven't
done it as you move forward and
Mr Chair Center. I think they
probably
He's he's he's
okay. Think about it as you as
an agency. And if you could work
with them, if it is something
you could do, Um, that was a
question I had
And, um, page 48 years under the
trafficking that we just did.
You said Give up. You took off
the term giveaway. So can you
explain why you did that can
understand why we did it for the
sales and commercial reasons for
someone's coming in and just
giving it away. Why are we not?
Yes, that Mr Chair.
And I think that's on page 44. I
had 48 when I do my notes,
right so often the definition of
trafficking through our laws
includes reference to bartering
or giving away
Um, I was the one who who kind
of insisted on taking that
language out.
Based on my observation of folks
in the cannabis industry.
Who
Are often engaging in partnering
activities or giving things away
in a way that is not the kind of
thing that we're talking about.
We're talking about trafficking
and I didn't want to
inadvertently felonies. Uh,
Industry participants. Ah,
Under this provision, So, Hmm.
So, Mr Senator, so barter.
So you're on. You're still this
would only include people are
going to actually give you cash
or car or something like that.
You can still do this. I forget.
It wouldn't be included in this
to the Oklahoma and bring it
back in the trade it for
Food stamp that be illegal.
Also, I'm trying to think of
something you could borrow it
for a bicycle that you eat like
lawfully bought, Um, but it's
still a commercial transaction.
So So, Mr Chair, Senator.
That's still gonna often be
someone doing that without a
license, so that's going to make
it to a misdemeanor or someone
working beyond the bounds of
their license. So again, it's a
misdemeanor. Uh, the only you
the only people who can kind of
give away Uh, cannabis now is if
it's your home your own
homegrown. You're not doing it
for money.
Um, but even you know, license
expense. Aries can't give away
cannabis for free. Um, that's
that's already so This is okay.
I get it. I'll drop because
we're talking about the
difference between music. Okay,
I got it now.
Um, I will. I will. Yeah. We
were talking about this earlier.
Why are we
Having a different penalty for
adults.
18 to 21 vs over 21. Do we do
that anywhere?
Else because it is illegal to
consume under his to consume
alcohol. So why would we? You're
18. You're an adult juvenile,
said Gregory Court. Why would we
only one and Mr Chair Senator,
That was an approach that was
taken originally in the bill of
differentiating between 18 year
olds and 21 Year olds, I think,
because
Uh, 21 year olds, uh, are the
only one
And
I think overall, there's
probably there is a desire to,
uh not unnecessarily.
Push our young adults into
felonies. If there's
Okay, That's not absolutely boy
and 21 year old boy. Good point
that much. Um Okay, so I get
that I understand your theory.
So thank you.
We talked about that already
than I do.
Lastly, on my notes here, Okay,
so there's nothing in this bill
that caps or that that issue has
been in the press. Correct.
Mr Chair, Senator, You're right
that that is not in this bill.
Um, that was something that
we've been talking about.
throughout the interim. Um, but
that is not something we trust.
You,
Um, want to get back to the
supply issue on about the
section 21 word?
The sun. You're removing the
sunset. When was that supposed
to happen?
Mr Chair, Senator that will be
next year. So if we don't
Take that out now, then, that
the plant council go away before
we meet next and we will have a
truly truly super saturated
market because that's where my
question is gonna go is we have
a saturated market for all the
things we're talking you talked
about, but yet it's still
profitable for people to bust it
in from Oklahoma.
And so there's still a demand
here in pride into the state, So
it's if it's still profitable
for them to grow it in Oklahoma,
Colorado over Arizona,
California ship it here and make
a profit.
Why wouldn't we have been grown
here in New Mexico where you
guys are regulating it and get
rid of that plant counted the
force those Oklahoma folks from
to start looking elsewhere.
It would be better if it's
saturated market. I'd rather be
saturated with New Mexico
product that's being regulated
and you guys have the the
Force of government to go after
them through Clayton with it.
So I'm trying to have a hard
time squaring now why we would
want not want to get it and
understand the business aspect
you talk about and some of them,
But I'd rather have that We've
grown into Mexico regulating and
controlling from seed to sale,
and we know that and pushed
those Oklahoma's folks for that.
And Mr Chair, Senator, So one.
It is so cheap for these folks
in Oklahoma that that it's never
not going to be profitable for
them.
To traffic it here. How are they
able to do? I? I don't know The
answer that question. I don't
know. My experts to part of it
is our plant feast. So there is
a $5 per plant licensed
producers. Secondly, they're not
always bringing in legal
cannabis from out of state.
They've got more water than we
do. Um, and they're able to
Not just in the same way. We're
not only talking about Oklahoma
here in California we have
already seized or found product
that's been brought in from
Not just in the same way. We're
not only talking about Oklahoma
here in California. We have
already seized or found product
that's been brought in
California. Um and so they're
just bringing it in, you know,
illegally grown legally and also
point out the plant count limits
that we have ants. I think we
only have and Todd correct me
One licensee use actually capped
that
So the issue really is that
we've hit our maximum number of
plants for the state that you
know. Most of our licenses are
nowhere already the capacity as
far as legally to have more of
our growers grow more plants.
That's not really the issue the
issue that helps me a lot. So
what I heard you say, is that
high taxes and overregulation or
hurting new Mexico small
businesses don't believe that's
exactly what I said. That's what
I heard all comments or subject.
That's exactly what I'm so this
is friendly. Oklahoma is able to
grow weed and ship it here
cheaper than our high tax over
regulated states. So that's
that's quite interesting to me.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
madam Chair.
No, No, We were on the bill, Mr
Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Senator. I want to
understand the change on page
20. We spent a whole bunch of
top on this language. So what,
exactly?
Who under this under this
amendment, Who are we now
exempting from the requirement
that they show a legal right to
water. And why are we? Why are
we doing that?
So, Mr Chair Senator right now
under our current law if you
have a retail shop, you have to
prove you have water rights. If
you are doing nothing but making
pre rolls, you have to prove
water rights. If you want to
have any license, you have to
prove water rights. Whether
you're using water or not, And
that creates an unreasonable
barrier to a whole lot of folks.
Who don't have water rights
because they don't need them.
Um And so what we want to do is
we want to focus that
requirement to show water rights
to the people who are actually
using water, and that is the
producers and the micro
producers.
So, Mr Chair and senator, so
right now, if
I open a retail shop. What's the
department?
Doing in terms of the
requirement for water rights. I
mean, what? How do you even
Figure out how much water rights
would go with the retail shop,
Or is it making the retail shop
go up the chain to show that the
product they're bringing in?
It's kind of water rights. So my
understanding and please correct
me if I'm wrong, Mr. Chair,
Senator, The division is not
They are not enforcing the water
right requirement against retail
folks. Now they are against
manufacturers. So if if I have a
level one manufacturing license
where all that means is I am
packaging. I'm just taking
already grown cannabis and
putting it in packages are
putting it or rolling it into a
pre roll. Uh, I'm not using
water at all.
I still have to prove my water
rights. Um
Okay, Mr Caron that that makes
it makes sense to me and
especially if if
Again. It's the status quo is
There's not any way to even
Begin to determine what that
makes sense as long as as long
as those producers that are
providing the product to the
retail have this requirement. I
think that's why your changes in
here Ah, one other couple of and
we'll number of things have been
addressed. I very much
appreciate the second degree
felony coming out.
Page 38 line for taking out the
requirement for comfort,
compostable and recyclable or
made from recycled materials for
packaging is curious. What what,
what? Why are we doing that Mr
Chair Senator, it's because
those are incredibly hard to
find and super expensive And so
it's. It's just hard for
It is a It is a nice aspiration
for us to have, but it is one
that realistically, a lot of
folks are never going to be able
to achieve because it is too
costly or just simply
unavailable. Um, and so it's not
being enforced now and so and
We shouldn't have language in
here that we're not gonna end
for us.
So, Mr Chair and senators are
basically what you're saying.
It's similar to the water
requires
Doable.
If, in fact they didn't let me
ask this, Mr.
Folks providing these kinds of
packaging.
Mm. Mr Chair, Senator. Not that
I'm aware of, but
Mr Stevens might know better
than I,
uh, Chairman, Mr Senator, not to
my knowledge that that we have
anyone that's able to do this.
There may be a few out there
that are statistical outliers.
But for the majority we see
none. I appreciate the
The packaging for Paige under
this and that makes a ton of
sailing. It's up above. I just
used in my office talking about
Vaping and all those changes.
That's what I have for now.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I did have
a few amendments. I don't know
if it would be
Okay if we pass out handful
The first and I'll if it's okay
with the chair I can discussed,
Um Mr Chair and senator
essentially
Currently, alcohol is not
allowed to just bring Canada.
Uh um, When I first heard about
this going on, I think it
Gave me a little bit of pause
Just because
One, you know, checking I d s
and B going on supposed to be
going on this would allow or
ensure that the level that it
needs to be done so this this
would be I d. C. The person see
their demeanor.
Ensuring that they're not a
neighbor. Mr. Chair, Senator, I
think that is a friendly
amendment. My only suggestion is
that we insert the word retail
before establishment just to
make clear. I think that's
that's your your intention, but
but that would be a friendly
amendment. Mr Chairman.
So I guess.
Yes, Mr Chair.
We just barely
Hmm. I saw Mr I don't know. We
didn't really hear anyone from
the audience. I just would be
curious if there's any
Retailers that currently have
Drive up windows that are going
to be very unhappy about seeing
a lot of shaking heads back
there.
Um
I guess I'm a little bit
concerned just that.
Pretty significant.
Rule change.
It's going in place and
Again. I'm a little hesitant to
do it without hearing from my
folks here in Santa Fe, both of
these things up and use them all
the time.
But again, take a vote on it.
See where it goes.
As we try to adopt rules so that
I can anticipate going to the
audience and public. I think
that it also understands some
words point, which is when we
see amendments. The public may
not have an opportunity to know
what the amendments are gonna be
into have signed up on the
amendments in advance, so that
creates a little bit of a
challenge. On the other hand, I
think the committee would agree.
We can't go to the public and
the audience and zoom in the
remainder of the
Session, which
As I'm finally remembering this
bill, remember two sessions of
going through this bill
repeatedly and then a special
They want to just give me or
someone, someone from the
honesty. You guys want to
coordinate? Just one person That
can kind of let me know what
What? What retailers steal
about Okay. Thank you. Uh oh,
It's a little weird on the
microphone. Okay, There we go.
Can everybody hear me?
Okay. Uh, sorry. I'm not too
sure how to address everyone.
There we go. I'm allowed person.
I don't even need the mic. To be
honest. Okay, There we go. Okay,
So address your comments to me.
Yes, sir. Um, that takes care of
the whole committee, and we're
on a very specific topic, which
is drive through sales. All
right.
There we go. I'm allowed person.
I don't even need the mic to be
honest. Okay, There we go. Okay.
So address your comments to me.
Yes, sir. Um, that takes care of
the whole committee. And we're
on a very specific topic which
is drive through sales. Alright.
Ah, Mr. Chair, Um, channels
owner
Okay, Cool. Um, yeah, I'm here
to talk about the drive
throughs. Um, the reason why it
would be a huge issue to end
them. Um, is there certain
patients that can't even go into
a dispensary, so a lot of them
rely on a drive through to get
their medicine in the first
place? So unlike alcohol, we
don't have a medicinal alcohol
program, so it's a little bit
different when it comes to
cannabis. Cannabis. It's a
totally different ball game.
We're dealing with the people
who actually use this as
medicine. And he's even some
people that don't have a medical
cannabis card. They use it as a
medicine.
So some of these people either
feel they
To be honest of people I talked
to. They don't want to get a
medical cannabis card because
they have a carry, conceal, or
they don't want to. They fear of
losing a carry concealer
something there is that concern
and then you have the people
that who are just patients that
don't want to get their card for
whatever reason, and some of
these people in wheelchairs,
they can't get into a store, and
this gives them the opportunity
to get the cannabis that they
need, you know, And it's also
really great because some of
these places will close the
lobby at a certain time, and
they keep the drive through
open.
And what that does is it ensures
that people that you really
don't want around at a certain
hour. They're not going to be
there and someone who maybe
works at a hospital or maybe
work somewhere that get off of
BB four AM five AM they have an
opportunity to go to the
dispensary is still, um, so this
would really hurt the industry.
Um, mostly on the patient side,
the medical cannabis patients
because most of us rely on the
drive throughs, and they're
still setting them up like
something park.
Sorry, something parks still
getting some drive throughs and
stuff like that. So
To me. My fearful thing would be
it would hurt my patients. More
than anything. I'm a patient
myself. Um and I see patients
all the time, especially
veterans who are in wheelchairs.
Thank you. Thank you.
Right center worth.
Mr Chair. That's all I will
issue. The reasons raised. I
would oppose this amendment
anyone else?
O'Neill.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair,
and I apologize. I was in the
hallway. So this, uh, senator
doing this is a friendly
amendment.
So, Mr Chair, Senator.
We're just whispering about
that. I think for
So this is an agency bill and I
don't think that the agency was
really taking a position on this
one way or another, so it would
be friendly for them.
For me personally, I I found
that testimony compelling. Uh
And so I was just whispering. Do
you mind if I vote against it?
Because Because this is this is
like, uh, an agency bill. Uh,
Thank you. And if I may, Mr
Terry and I just have Senator
Pirtle, explaining to senses why
this is necessary to abolish.
What is the problem with the
drive up?
And thank you for being
redundant, Mr Church, but, um,
drive up window at a chain.
Um, drive up when you send your
idea, and they just asked
through. Well, are you so and so
What's the attract to us is, you
know Percocets or whatever the
the
Chicken.
Yes. And so that's where I got
the idea that you know this
could be happening. Just
eliminate that and then being
able for the people selling to
Suncor. They anything else will
that And I think
Most imagine, even though it's
against federal law that they
would have client. But that was
just where that thank you. Mr
Chairman. Senator. Is this a an
issue in your district? I mean,
are people emailing you about
the drive up windows and their
menace to society and so forth.
No. Mr Chair and Senator, I
think it was just more parity
with alcohol. We don't We don't
allow this for alcohol for when
you
Walk into an establishment. You
have to present yourself the
walk in and your demeanor and
how you're walking. They're not
going there less likely.
Okay, Great. Thank you.
And Mr Chair if I may, uh,
Mr Stevens was just saying, And
I think they could do this. By
rule. They could put
restrictions on the use of drive
ups that say things like has to
be a person to person. You can't
use that kind of bank teller.
Ah, kind of a model. So I I
I. It's sounds like CCD is open
to adopting rules to address
some of the I think very
Uh, good concerns that you're
raising over here. Sophomores.
Famous. Thank you, Senator. I
totally think that we should do
this. I remember all those
remember when I got here to go
to college, and I was just
floored with the windows and I
think it was during your your
Florida today and you could buy
I'll joking. You're not floored
going through the was I did not
mean that. But yeah, you could
go through those drive up
liquors.
Stands and very drunk, and
that's what beginning of, I
think it's probably one of the
first. Um and maybe Senator
Stewart was there. There was a
Johnson administration that we
ban those, and that was a big
deal. It took many years. It
wasn't as bad as cockfighting,
but it took a lot of years to
ban those for all the same
echoed arguments. I just heard
and
The liquor stores invested money
in it. It was convenient for
consumers, and yet people were
just driving up drunk and you
don't have to get out of your
car and show your inebriated
remember driving through Saints
and sinners and Espinola, you
know they made those same exact
arguments. And if you're wasted
and you pull up to a window,
alcohol or weed
And you're not actually creating
out and if you're stumbling and
everything else that happens if
you're really drunk and could be
could be high, you could be
drunk. You could be drawn going
to get weed. Um, at least
walking in or handicapped issues
that you talked about. You have
to go in assuming or being in
the car if they're already
intoxicated on others and step
away from that, so
All those arguments I just heard
or same arguments they made
about drive up liquor windows,
and I can't imagine any of us
supported drive up literally got
rid of him all those years ago,
so I didn't know you were
playing in the senator.
I'm actually quite pleased that
you
Thank you anyone else? So I'd
like to just way into I will
support the amendment and I
appreciate the very much the
gentleman who spoke to us and
you may have persuaded some
members of the committee. So
congratulations for for doing
so.
Um, the reason that I still feel
that this is important is first
of all, we had a history of
medicinal marijuana for many
years before we legalized,
supported the medicinal
marijuana for those many years.
I don't recall. You know all
those years we have medicinal
marijuana. Anybody telling me
they couldn't get access to
medicinal marijuana? Because we
didn't have didn't clearly
The middle of the medicinal use
of marijuana was not a back
through windows.
There there.
The elimination of drive through
Windows for alcohol was very
hotly debated here. I can't
remember. Um I see all the nods
and the heads of those have been
around a long time. This was a
huge issue was fought very
aggressively. The street
Everybody from Albertsons on
down had drive through alcohol
windows was a popular place of
sales, and there was a great
deal of discussion debate for
the reasons why that was
eliminated. Those were
ultimately compelling, and it
had an enormous economic
presumably, but maybe not at
all. Maybe folks had to come
inside and and by their beer
that way, too, But that was the
argument of time was that was
going to have a huge economic
consequence.
Um, the it's a balance we're
having to make a balance here
and
The balance between fatalities
in the state of New Mexico,
Drunk driving fatalities
impaired driving Fidelity's I'm
looking at the chief of the
state police in the audience,
and ultimately I'm looking out
for him, and I'm looking out for
the people on the roads. I think
there there needs in my mind
have to be more important to all
the motorists on the road.
Um to the inconvenience of folks
having to navigate their way
into, presumably in 88 compliant
business, or have someone else
do the purchase them? So for me
the balance with um and the
fatality from impaired drivers.
I think those are those are more
important, So I'm going to
support the amendment for that
reason anyone else Mr. Chair?
I'll just mention we also have
delivery now.
Right. So that's that's true
too, as well. 23. I'm just not
very again with due respect to
the gentleman, he his
motivations are right to help
people who are relying on
marijuana from for medicinal
purposes. But as I said, we had
that for many years without any
problems, and there are many
other alternatives, and I have
not. Had anybody ever tell me
they can't drive through
Windows.
And I do find it A great deal of
concern in Las Cruces. I think
I've seen it here in Santa Fe
analyst Chris You can get
marijuana 24 hours a day that
troubles me candidly, and I
think I don't know how we can
escape.
Somebody buying dope at two or 3
A.m. on a Friday night.
I don't think that's wise, but
the city of Oscars has seen
otherwise.
Because that's why I'm not the
mayor.
In any event. Uh, we're on the
amendment.
Which is 6 95.1.
Right through windows. Let's do
this as a roll call, please, Mr.
Chair. Can I ask before we go to
that? Did we adopt the amendment
to the amendment of adding
retail?
Um, let's just is there any
objection adding the word
retail?
Alright. So on the amendment
without amendment, thank you for
the clarification. Roll call,
please. You know
Yes.
Yes, that amendments adopted
next Amendment center personal
you have more
This one. Emily past? Yes. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and thank you,
Senator. This came from
essentially.
Discussions that are interim
committee this
Yeah.
Um, this was because of issues
brought forward. Uh
Um and and stuff that we've been
discussing as to where is it
from Oklahoma. Is it not from
Oklahoma? Did you purchase it
legally, Did you not purchase it
legally, and then it ties in
well with the next amendment
that I have
Um
But this just is requiring a
proof of purchase.
And I think through rule.
Can really clarify this as to as
to what that is. This was
something that was important in
my original bill.
Um, that I thought would really
help with with what we're
dealing with, and really the
unintended consequences. Also,
one has to do is claim that I
It's home. Um anything else. But
this
Senator doing on 6 96.1.
Yes, Mr Care, so I think this is
leaning in the direction of
unfriendly, uh, for a couple of
reasons. One our packaging
requirements already is, I think
sufficient that you could see if
you pull someone over and see
what they have in there. You'll
see if it's um but also we don't
require so.
So we require at a retail
establishment that folks put
Whatever you're buying an opaque
bag. We don't require them to
give a receipt.
Ah, so without having that
requirement. Um I don't
We? I don't think it's a good
idea to to include this
requirement here of showing
proof of purchase because that's
not a requirement because there
are folks who when I go into a
dispensary, and they say, Do you
want a receipt? I say no and
walk out with my opaque bag. Um,
but if we're not making, giving
a receipt, a requirement, I
would not want to put something
in here.
That
That would require showing proof
of purchase to a law enforcement
officer. And I think that that
safety is is built in because of
our
So long story short. I think
it's unfriendly.
Senator Poodle four on the man.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator,
and I do agree, and I think I
guess in my mind, the proof of
purchase is the packaging. The
idea is just that loop product
that, um that looks like it
should have, you know, animal
crack. That's that's what we're
trying to help. The cannabis
That is, the about is is not the
stuff that's in the opaque
packaging and those things.
Which in my mind the way I read
it, you know that would be if
that's you know, a holdup.
Obviously, I don't wanna waste
too much of the committee's
time, but that's that's the
intent of it. Mr. Chair,
Senator, I think we would need
to define proof of purchase if
we were were to adopt this
amendment.
But I also think there are folks
who
Will not always keep their
cannabis in the packaging that
they bought it in. They might
put it in something to say,
control the smell or just
because it looks cool. Uh and I
would not want someone choosing
to use
A different packaging than the
one that they were sold to then
be subject potentially to, uh, a
misdemeanor.
Just because of that.
Just because they couldn't prove
that they bought this from a
dispensary because they threw
that bag away, and they put it
into their cool, old carrying
case and also Mr Chair Senator,
There's home grow because we
allow for home grow. There's not
gonna be proof of purchase.
From those, Um and so and how
are they?
They're pulled over.
Uh, how are they going to prove
sitting there that this was
allowable home grow?
That's all Senator or Mr
Stevens. Did you want to say
something, Mr Chairman, Senator,
along with the idea that you
have a home grow, um to Senator
Morris point earlier, they may
be choosing a package.
Personally, I think you know
with the home grove
Two, and I do think as long as
Seeing now is because of the
homegrown
But I
So you withdrawn this center.
Because
With chose to withdrew it.
696 withdrawn were handing out 6
97.1. So this this addresses the
issues I've had with homegrown.
I don't
I think it's that big of an
issue. We're still talking about
a substance that is illegal,
federally.
Um
But just put a little bit of
A tool for law enforcement and
for people If you're gonna home
grow, you know, it requires a
license. Just
To say, distill alcohol. You
can't do that at home. It's a
felony to distill alcohol at
home Still
Um And then, with beer and wine,
There's a small limited amount,
but it's It's a very small
amount. Not quite the amount
would produce, so I think this
just brings some parody to that.
Uh um.
And ensures one that officers
then know that hey, the license
to do so and intended weed out.
And Mr Chair. This is an
unfriendly amendment. Uh, mostly
because CCD doesn't have the
capacity.
To to do this to register every
home grower and in the state,
and we're trying to build up
there or trying to make sure
that they can
Ah, you know,
Investigate. Uh, the licenses
already, Um, they don't have the
capacity to brutal and friendly
amendment. Anything else? Thank
you, Mr Turner. I do find that
interesting. I wonder how many
licensed hunters there are.
In the state, and it's done in
one day, and it seems to be
handled quite have a
registration process that
I get not being for their I mean
the registration process could
be your address and number of
plants.
Thank you. Anyone else on the
committee on the proposed
amendments? Morris, is that a
hand just quickly. I tend to
agree on this issue with Senator
Pirtle. It's so easy to the
states. You just go there and
you guys already have apps and
websites that you spend the
simple requirement that he's
issue. I support you anyone else
on the proposed amendment?
Mr Church. If I may, uh, they
still wouldn't have the ability
to the capacity to enforce it so
we would be creating
Creating a requirement that
realistically would not be
enforced. And so then what is
the purpose of that requirement
on the amendment? Let's take a
roll call, please. The motion
before us is to adopt the
No.
No, that amendment fails. Center
Pirtle yourself floor. You, Mr
Turner. I think the next one
Deals with think this issue is
quite interesting. I mean, I
think it was said, um, with the
plant counts. It's the last
page.
Right section 21.
Repeal Lost 2021 Chapter four,
Section seven. So you know, I
just found it interesting. This
was put in. Um I don't like the
idea of changing the rules as
quick and everybody was in
agreeance do with the writing of
this law and then to pull this,
um, I also
I think Oklahoma is a perfect
example.
If they're heis apply to drive
the price down to keep the
illicit market.
And as long as we keep the price
high illicit market will always
be able to thrive.
And so I think this issue of
kind of before we even try.
Open plant counts we're talking
about. We don't even know which
one it was. I saw you. Mouth is
better at doing something and
they have the ability to grow.
No, I think that's what we
should be pushing towards push
the Oklahoma
Mr Care. This isn't unfriendly
Amendment. This will
For reasons. I think we've gone
over already. It's getting late,
so I can expand on that if you
like. One sentence summary, Give
me your best one sentence
summary to a post we have a
super saturated market is
unhealthy market. This will
continue to make that worse and
it will only benefit one really
big guy.
Yeah, And I'm just going to
reiterate it far far system
here. I got to start. Brandon
gave me this article. Um, that
says that the estimate that 40%
of the Maryland would you like
to estimate what
That's why you don't have to.
And it's about a Mr Terror
senator. My understands about a
third of our market is illicit
Oklahoma is that much more
business friendly, lower taxes
or regulations that they're able
to produce this and ship it to
New York City. And for a lot
cheaper, um, that
We need to be looking at how
we're taxing and regulating it
So New Mexico businesses
besides, one you're talking
about there should be other New
Mexico. Small businesses should
be able to fill this market and
not Oklahoma because we taxed
too high and over a chance to
compete against Oklahoma. This
message brought to you by
libertarians
match Thank you, Senator Morris.
Inspiring.
Others on the proposed a man.
I'll just all oppose it, too.
Although again
It does, I think merit at least
recognizing that when we passed
this law, one of the biggest
arguments made was it would be
in the sunshine of the state,
and we have unicorns and
rainbows and ferries forever. Um
and being a third of the product
now coming in illegally.
From Oklahoma, So we've just
created an entire illegal
Industry in New Mexico and
illegal market here.
And the question for me is not
so much to
Go back and be mon what we did a
couple of years ago, but I'm
But I also respect
This doesn't sound like it from
the sponsor. This is going to
fix it.
But I do think it's important
for us to recognize that the
original goal of business and
marketing legal sales is really
that's unfortunate for new
Mexicans Always agree with
Senator Morrison, the respect
that you have
We've created an import market
from other states, which
I'm surprised it's not. Frankly,
I'm surprised. It's not going
from Mexico. I think that's
probably answer.
Leasing the border very well
these days.
That's it. Um, we're on the
amendment will take a roll call
closer this time around.
No amendment fails on a 3 to 3
times, right Next Amendment
center Purtell and, um
I noting that I had indicated
the committee and intention to
do a hard stop at six. We're
already beyond a little bit, but
I'm always looking loose, so I'm
also I'm also in a little bit in
the dark here to see how many
more amendments we have some
center Pirtle.
And perhaps others, and then I
also know we have an entire
committee sub sitting back here
next to me two or 3 ft. Thick.
I wish. Uh, Interestingly some
of you all serve on the
committees committee. You know,
we've been trying this whole
session on committees committee
did not too much so we can say
paper, but it's all destroyed in
this one instance by the very
sub committee seven here, so
All right, Senator Pirtle on
709.1 Amendment Proposed diesel
pickup on does and does the work
of many electric vehicles. Um
This amendment.
This is an issue that was
brought to me by
The tax revenue.
That is generated.
And the amount of plants that
are registered with the
department. So this would just
require
Reporting from the tax and
website of things many, um
How much cannabis was sold and
how much tax versus how much was
registered through the seed to
sell program so that we could
really have a true idea of how
much illicit cannabis is
getting. How much are we
actually missing out? I think
it's a simpler way of finding
those numbers to see if we do
actually have
With illicit sales, so this
would just between the two
departments force some type of
report
Oh, Mr Chair, Senator, um
I think CCD can't endorse this
amendment. Uh, because of impact
on another state agency. I think
without their input, but I'll
also note
Different plants have different
yields. So just calculating
scenes how much tax revenue you
got versus how many plants are
registered? Isn't actually going
to give you that much
information. Um, because it's
not like you're getting the same
amount of cannabis from every
plant that is registered.
So
So I think this is this is
leaning unfriendly, Mr Chair and
Senator. I mean, that sounds
like a conversation that we
might have, but I just
I just know that they probably
don't line up and leave from
Oklahoma. You know, this is a
way that we can at least look
into it and see
Mr Chair. I I don't think it's
going to give us the
information. I understand the
the motivation behind behind the
amendment.
I just wanted to appreciate the
Navy.
On this Titanic is that would
Is that what I'm hearing over
here? I think the iceberg is in
the room, Mr Chair.
Ship is sinking before our eyes,
others on the proposed
amendment.
It's kind of an interesting
thing. I don't see anyone else
on the on the amendments. I
smile at my Republican
colleagues because, especially
after Senator Morris's so
eloquently espoused the
interests of small business as a
small businessman. I'll tell you
one of the things that
It is important to small
business people. I think we'd
all love to know what Senator
Morris tax revenues would be.
But the bill here would, um
I just would allow for that
information for the tax revenue
from
I think that I think our policy
right now.
It's probably good to make that
very hard to get to, but But
there's a times there's many
times when I think that's not.
That's a problematic policy
because we look at tax credits,
or we talked, talked about tax
policy and try and figure out
what the impact is. We don't
know what it is, but
This amendment would it says the
taxi ocean Revenue story prepare
a report of the revenue declared
by Canada's establishments.
Tax filings that that's clear
whether that be an aggregate. Um
Tax filing, which I think we do.
get that information. We get
information on various sectors
in Agra, but not
An individual businesses, so
that would be my concern. Here
is the protection of small
businesses. Center, Morris. Um,
I do appreciate what something
promised a bunch of revenue were
promised. It's clear that we
are. I think we all know there's
a lot of sales going on that are
not reported.
A lot of sales that are taking
place. There's an entire
industry and for whatever
strange reason to me, we seem to
be tolerant.
Tolerated much.
For
Lawyers.
Or other industries as well.
Things
Senator Worth so, Mr Chair. I
must say, the other having your
mayor from Sunland Park. Talk
about what's going on about 30
dispensaries. But look at the
revenue that's coming in. It's
redoing all their downtown. I
mean to me. There is a very
positive, I think.
This. This talk negatively
above.
Good result of this statute, and
I actually was. I thought that
someone parked mayor
Kind of articular that it's
tricky because again, it could
change pretty quickly. Texas
does
But I do think
His testimony in and fixing up
all the old, dilapidated
buildings and bringing in
Different establishments that
work with it, So I think there's
another side to this that does
justify and again and appreciate
very much. The sponsor.
Doing these tweaks, which need
to happen is the big, big, big
new industry and I think it's
important to work to get it
right.
Thank you, senator. And I and I
did purposely put on America's I
know he loves the extra million
dollars a year and a small
committee. That's an important
thing for them to have.
We'll spend all night debating
what the social consequences of
Children growing up in a
community where there's a
dispensary on every street
corner. Um
Or
In my case going to the New
Mexico Bowl game, I smile
because we passed a law last
session about what the official
state of Roma should be. I got
to tell you when I go to most
gatherings these days in New
Mexico, this state aroma is not
green chili roasting. I assure
you, uh,
But but again, I recognize the
will of the state has been to go
in a different direction than
that. And so, really, the
amendment before us is really
reporting of revenue and
comparing that to plant counts
and the only reason I think that
would be great value, and it
would be is to know how much of
the
Industry is taking place without
being taxed and and we would go
to jail for that.
But we don't seem to be too
troubled. Mr Care. Another
complicating factor here is that
medical sales are not taxed so
You're you're gonna end up
seeing data that looks wacky
even when it's when it's not
illicit.
Wars.
Um, one of the concerns I have
about this particular amendment.
you were before you ultimately
talked. Is that as we talked
about earlier, some producers
are going to genetically grow
different products for different
reasons, so we're going to grow
the opinion size trees just get
quantity, others gonna grow
genetically modified to get some
quality or just some others, you
know?
So it would be like pending on
what kind of product and how
some of this position himself in
the Marcel so I shared things
out there. Besides, before us as
amendment 709.1. Is there any
other discussion?
We'll call Please. Emily.
Sorry, Pirtle.
No, no.
The nurse. Servants know that
amendments of 9.1 failed. How
many? We got plenty more to more
gang
story in my movie do pass the
Senate Bill six as amended.
Senator the motion.
There's something I'm gonna
delay taking No telling you
because I'm going to leave very
soon. Have a
need to be members. I think we
have to respect that because I
didn't tell you what we're to
have a hard stop time. I'm
prepared to stop at this time,
Um, without consideration these
two amendments
The disappointment is going to
come to the sponsor. I realized
by doing so, but I also have to
tell you that I have a number of
questions, things that and so if
a little bit more
Alacrity, efficacy efficiency,
perhaps without those topical
Conversations could stay a few
more minutes. I appreciate that
advice. Thank you. Uh, alright.
I don't know how you're gonna do
from the chair of the Senate
When we all start debating on
the floor. We'll have to see how
you can get us to behave a
little bit better, but, um,
wishes of the committee sponsor
again. I know you'd like to not
be coming back here again on
Wednesday.
That's my suggestion that we do
do that. I don't know really
know what other do do any other
members have amendments besides
are brutal.
Hmm. Center Baca Input Not on
the amendments. Uh, just letting
Mr chair off the hook here so I
would move. We recess and finish
this up Another committee
members Sorry anyone else in the
committee? Mr Chair? Dude, I I
would very much like us to just
finish up tonight. It sounds
like we're
Close to done with senator
petals amendments and I know you
have some some comments and
questions, but delaying this
will then realistically, we're
not even being heard and finance
until next week. I mean,
delaying this.
Helps kill the bill.
Barker,
Mr Chair, and I'll just be frank
with you right now. Mr Chairman,
Senator, I'm inclined to support
your bill. Certainly, I mean the
debate and the questions and
things that they they're just
things that need to get done.
That's all you know, but but the
way your bill stands right now,
even if none of the amendments
went probably be supportive of
this bill, as it is
They're worthy. Mr Chair. I do
think, though the fact that it
needs to go through finance
because the budget is about to
cross over, So there is a
limited and then they're going
to shut down. And so that's the
reason
Well, we'll We'll soldier on
tonight and I just want to
Disabused use senator doing
there's there's no intention on
my part to kill this bill.
Probably candidly when when I
say I have a number of comments
and suggest more and so we'll
get it done tonight.
And my regrets to those of you
who made other plans for the
evening.
Um, Senator
Brutal on 739.1.
Um so I think this is just
And Mr Kerry. This is an
unfriendly amendment for a
couple of reasons. Uh, one Plant
council only apply to mature
plants at one time, so
If you're doing it, right. If
you are a micro business, you
can have 800 to 1000 plants at a
time doing perpetual harvest.
You just have them all going at
different stages. Uh and
That's some information that
that perhaps some of the micro's
aren't aware of, but they are
not. This is not actually 200
plants. This is in reality and
functionally 800 to 1000 plants
at one time, and if someone
wants to go beyond that, then
they should graduate to a full
license. They don't want to do
that because they don't want to
pay plant fees.
Uh, that's the other problem
with this. This will take away
revenue from CCD, because right
now, we say, since microbes
aren't charged plant fees for
their 200, we don't charge
anyone.
For the 1st 200 increase this
limit than ever. No one pays
plant fees on their 1st 500
plants, which again that's 500
mature at one time, so times
that by three or four
To understand how many plants
were actually talking about
here.
Um, also, if you're a micro
It's a really good way to get
yourself and your struggling
already and and let me back up,
actually.
There. We have businesses that
are going to fail. There are a
whole lot of people who jumped
into this industry because they
like cannabis.
They have no growing experience.
They have no business plan. They
have no experience running a
business and they're going to
fail.
It is not our responsibility as
a state.
To make sure that everyone
succeeds simply because they
want to if they're not if
they're not.
Otherwise qualified and prepared
to do so. Um, so a lot. There's
a lot of microbes that are
failing, but it's not because
the plant count
Increasing the plan account is
also a really good way to dig
yourself into a really big hole
of debt, because if you already
are not well situated to succeed
as a business, and now you're
taking on all these extra
plants, as in hopes that that
somehow will make your business
now successful, you're actually
just going to be in deeper debt.
Because now you're having to pay
for and care for.
More plants that is more
expensive, So I think if micro's
don't want to be micro's, then
they should get a full license.
But we have some microbes that
are multimillion dollar
businesses in this state who
would just like to have more
plants without pain?
That's all Mr Chair. It's a It's
an unfriendly amendment in case
that wasn't clear.
Anyway, it's still a small
number of plants or something
along that line,
Is the small
Um, only amendment Morris. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you, madam.
So I understand what you're
saying, and I'm trying to look
at what we did with the micro
brews where you said that there
when I heard you say was that up
to 200 plants? They're
concerned Micro. They're not
paying, um after 201 plants up
there, paying the $5.
On on that one. So if they had
201, they would be playing
paying the plant fee on that
one. So with microbrews Arnold
Senator Stewart was active in
this bill. Um, graduates up so
that we could actually encourage
New Mexico small businesses and
it paid off. We have some of the
brown estate
Um yeah, And it's fantastically
see how
Well, that industry has paid off
here in New Mexico, so I see it,
But senator pearls trying to do
and again to be the dead horse
that we're overtaxing and over
regulating the small businesses
that center Cervantes said. We
were this was supposed to allow
Folks who are small business
owners like those microbrewers
to be able to grow and develop
and have a business, so it makes
a lot of sense. Now you're
saying it's only if you do 300
plants the 1st 203, and then
then you paint
For the 3rd 100.
Mm mystery and it's a plan. It's
not a tax, but it's it's a plant
purpose Per plant B. Yeah, so I
like the idea of helping small
business become medium by with
an opportunity, and I just think
this highlights the fact that
we're overtaxing over.
Regulators thrive in New Mexico
become medium size business, Mr.
Thank you, everyone else on the
amendment.
No other discussion. The
amendment roll call only
No.
One more moment.
Yes, there is that we're looking
at 740.1.
This amendments withdrawn Pearl,
You have the floor. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Um, you know
I think
Most people
I would say I could was well
within my rights to say I told
you so.
Of it. Here we are.
It feels like Groundhog Day.
But I do appreciate at least
some movement.
Two.
Fix the process Elation, but I
do find it funny that most of
the man
Did fail. We're by myself as a
Republican brought up whenever
this was passed, were completely
ignored.
Um so I just I find it quite
interesting that still kept out
of the process, even though most
who were involved with, but I
wanted to draw your attention to
the definition of the cannabis
product.
And I'm just I'm wondering
online 14 where it says does not
in cannabis products.
That comply with the provisions
of the Cannabis Regulation Act.
Um
What would then make it where
they
And then on the homemade
cannabis happening.
So, Mr Chair, Senator, uh, for
homegrown people can use non
volatile solvents to do to do
extractions. Um so they people
can make their own edibles at
home as long as they're not
using volatile Uh oh.
Mr Chair.
Senator. I don't know if Mr
Stevens knows the answer to
that.
Chairman. Senator shouldn't be
using any ethanol to, uh at a
home to do extraction. You could
use water pressure heat or to
make an edible You can heat the
cannabis up in an oven and then
extracted using just traditional
butter, so no extraction would
be needed.
Interesting, Mr Chair. Thank
you. For that. I do have a
little pause with the way that's
written. I think, um
Deemed an illegal cannabis
product, but but I'll let it go.
For now. I think that just kind
of how open we are with the home
grow, but the main section, then
he seven
Um, sub paragraphs seven and I
just have issue we've we saw
this.
We've seen this in many other
laws. Um
Catch all language.
Where we lay out very specific.
We get to the end, and we've
kind of run out of all the
things we could think of, and
we've thrown. It just says any
other government will act
Applicant.
License your business in Mexico.
So essentially, I could shoot an
elk.
Outside of unit and have
Action pending against me and
then
The cannabis controlled tried to
get me another things could
essentially use this section.
Catch all
Being
So I haven't been to you could
essentially take the lie. Think
we should remove that section
and Mr I'm sorry.
Mr Chair, Senator so that that
would be unfriendly right now.
You get any offense as
determined by the division can
be a basis for revoking or
denying a license, so
That kind of flexibility has
already been built in because
this is a new industry. Uh and
frankly, regulators need to be
nimble in responding to new
circumstances that pop up. I
don't I don't know that any of
us were expecting there to be a
really big human trafficking
issue, uh, with a dark Denali
case, which is why that was not
addressed.
In our original bill. I don't
think anyone expected there's a
Company out of Oregon, who was
doing some shady stuff up there
and then came down here and got
a license. Uh, that wasn't
anticipated. There are going to
be issues that pop up that make
someone unfit to be
participating in our market that
frankly, we can't anticipate
right now. And so we need to
give our regulators some
flexibility in responding to
those circumstances.
But again right now that kind of
flexibility is already in our
law. And we don't see, uh CCD
saying I don't like you violated
a hunting something, and so
therefore I'm going to take your
Your license away. And so it's
not not a problem that we're
seeing currently, in theory to
do so.
Considered a fine if I may.
German center, referring back to
comments made earlier by
Senator Morris and we talked
about how one of the other
things being done in the bills
to clearly put all actions of
the CCD under untying that in
just the type of situation that
you fear there, there would be
due process afforded guarantee
the district court level the
burden of proof that exists
there is that we would have to
demonstrate that their actions
were not arbitrate would be
exactly the type of situation
that you know for some of the
other violations were crime
committed, or some conviction
had
Then that's a pretty simple case
for us to win on appeal if we
use that provision, where it's
the one where we're saying, you
know, this is some other topics,
something else that's pending
that we feel for this particular
Any district court judge is
going to hold us to a pretty
tough burden to establish that
what we did was not the
protections there that you're
worried about.
Who's on over there. Thank you.
Mr Chair with that I
Stage in motion again, please
center
Specifically that motion. That
motion is unfriendly. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I tend to agree with
Senator Pirtle on this one
for a couple of reasons. One is
because we already have that
power. We should state it again
in law is not a reason Mr Chair
and senator, that means that it
should be stricken on its face
just for just for that reason.
And the second is in the part
that I really don't like Mr
Chair is how easy for the agency
to sit here and say, Oh, they
have all their rights in place.
They just got to go to District
court. We just talked about
these micro businesses, and you
said it. They're already
hurting. You kind of uttered
that.
What costs a lot of money to go
to court and defend your license
and defend what you're what
you're making your living off
of. So I I don't agree with that
approach at all. Um, if I if I
had a state attorney in my
pocket, ready to defend my case,
how easy for me but the business
owner of which I am we gotta go
out and get our own lawyer. So
You know to to the agency, Mr.
Chair, um and and senator to
make statements like that. You
know, it really gives me pause.
I really don't like to hear that
sort of approach from an agency
because, um, I'm going to remind
everybody the agency works for
the people.
Not the other way around. So we
shouldn't burden the people
first.
And then depend on our state
attorney That's going to defend
us in court that the people have
to pay for as well.
And so I think there's a lot of
good reason and not to mention
the fact any other governmental
action
How broad is that? Do we
tolerate that anywhere? I I
think that that that is just I
mean, that could be anything.
Any single thing, And now you're
defending yourself in District
court at huge expense,
appreciate the sponsor from
considering this unfriendly, I
support the primped principally
because they're just so
ambiguous the proposal this
would be new language.
Yeah, and it would give the
authority for any other
government action pending.
To be a basis for
disqualification that's so
ambiguous in broad to me that it
almost screams out for an
arbitrary and capricious result
In my mind number one. You put
it out, but that would be
unlawful. But it just screams
out for it. Frankly and the
other concern I have endedly as
Undue influence on the agency if
they can deny a license to
anybody, for any reason they can
articulate think that that that
opens itself up to undue
influences and
I'm sad to say it. I'll just
throw it out there. We're seeing
in the news every day Corruption
in government sadly, corruption
in law enforcement. Um
And we should acknowledge it
exists and we can pretend it
doesn't we cannot talk about it.
But it exists and I certainly
don't suggest that that's taking
place in this administration or
this agency at this time.
But but we if we give the agency
the right to deny licenses for
any reason they decide which is
what this language does. I think
that amendment
Anyone else on the amendment
everyone clear on the amendment.
Roll call on that amendment.
No.
Yes, but that amendment fails
right before or more so well
center. Pearl still has the
floor. I think right separately
used.
No, that's uh, Mr Chair and out
of respect for had my phone, But
you need to go over this. Um, I
made a small note.
So we're striking.
Subsection Do your half of
minutes says the initial
application fee shall not
Exceed $125,000 for a license
for both medical cannabis. Um
and we're currently going to cap
Because of amendment that was
not adopted Earlier. What
So, Mr Chair, Senator, I think
the the overall plant count
limit is 20,000 per license so
someone can have multiple
license licenses and have, uh,
that that 20,000 limit.
Apply as many licenses as they
have
Her license. They get 20,000 so
currently at $5.
If somebody had 20,000 plants
that would be roughly $100,000.
Mr Chair, Senator. I'm bad at
math, but yes, that sounds
right. Okay, so my my concern
here is right now the language
exists up to $50. So yes,
currently
It's under 125,000.
But
If
Went rogue and made it 50. That
would be the license fee could
be
And so I just have huge concern,
taking this out and based, you
know, we're going to kick
something as big as, um, a
window of 121 $100,000 say that
because I mean there's a plant
count limit.
Um
Up to a million.
So, uh, I think I have a little
reservation that always just
struck some language that
Um, you know, we didn't need
this gives me quite a bit of
heartburn that
Because of other language in the
bill that it could then go to a
million dollars.
So I would move to the committee
that we, uh, strike the strike
through on Mr Chair. That's an
unfriendly amendment again. This
is corporate welfare to 11
entity. Only one entity has ever
benefitted from this. Um and
Frankly, if you're if you have
20,000 plants
You're making a lot of money you
can afford appropriate plan
fees. So this is corporate
welfare, plain and simple. That
puts everyone else in New Mexico
in this industry at a
competitive disadvantage, and I
don't see any reason why we
should be doing is that it?
Yes. Center Bacon. Thank you.
That's like the third time I've
heard that tonight. Um one
entity. I don't even know what
that means. Is there some reason
we're not naming names here or
because I don't know who that
is? So it's pure life. Mr Chair.
No, no, no, I'm sorry. It's not
your life. It's uh What? Ultra
Health Ultra health. Thank you.
My bad.
Anyone else on that proposed
amendment. The amendment is on
page 36.
To eliminate what would be the
beginning of line five.
On that amendment.
Show of hands. Just those in
opposite so
Morris Worth.
Neil Stuart Cervantes Stew Hig
Still have four. Thank you, Um
Mr Chair. I find that
interesting because yes. You're
talking about the one because of
that language being struck very
quickly.
People much, much smaller could
be well over find that
interesting that that's you
that, um
My next question, and then we
touched a little bit on it. Page
44.
Where we deal with 18 to
Um
I think my only concern here is
People that are trying to move
this cannabis illegally. You're
going to then 19 and 20 year
olds.
To do their dirty work because
there are probably quite low
Um, probably plead out for
something quite small, So I
think I I do have concerns that
these young people adults
Um
But that's really
We're definitely not going to
change those.
But I I think Mr Care if I may,
so this this amendment was
handed out from Senator Purtle,
I don't think you've moved it.
You pulled it, okay, because
actually, some of the language
on here is good.
Um
If we take out the stuff about
amending the delayed repeal this
stuff about section 17 and how
the division would calculate
plant limits that that's a good
change and and a good
suggestion. So I don't know if
you want to amend your amendment
and suggest that Mr Chair, maybe
we could reconsider some of the
other amendments first, and then
I could read
How that would work, But I'm
gonna pull it. Okay. Thank you.
And actually, if you look on
page 22 section P and going up
to 23 I remember this floor
amendment that was put on at the
last second, so I'm actually
great. Start on page 20 to 25
section P, um
Prove page 23 lines for
One more time you said Autumn
page 22 section P starting page
25 through line four on page 23
strikes the entire section P and
re number letter accordingly.
America College, put on
By a former senator. What's the
motion?
Senator. Dude, Mr Chairs CCD
does not have a position
They would you, senator
Mr Chair. I I'm torn. I will say
I originally I voted against
this on the floor because I was
worried about the precedent that
that it would set. Um, that
said, uh,
I think it is somewhat
problematic to take it out now
that it is there.
We'll take a roll call didn't
hear you taking a position. So
wait to say I vote, but But but
But it won't change my vote. I
don't see. I think the
Legislature
I could see that going very
badly of areas in other ways. So
you have the amendment. Is that
right? Okay.
Yes,
yes.
Yes, that amendment.
Morris. You got one that was it
thought that might go.
Anyone else before we get to me.
Um, there are a number of
things, but I'll try to go
through them quickly and
hopefully efficiently page 23.
Paragraph Q.
This would all be new language
that you're adding center.
Um, this is a convert This this
allows for a conversion from
what was established as a
nonprofit corporation for
medicinal purposes to any number
of different entities, which I
can I can understand why that
would happen. Doesn't I don't
know what I don't understand is
the language and here that says
the conversion
Um, must be approved by the
majority of the board of
directors of the nonprofit
That that should be entirely up
to the bylaws of that nonprofit
corporation. It seems to me and
Um
They may they may require
something more than a majority
because so specifying this in
statute about how they make that
conversion within the entity
itself doesn't make sense to me
unless you can tell me or
persuade me why, but I think
that's unwise. And then it goes
on to say upon conversion of
property remains in the newly
converted into all of that.
Contract law. That's corporate
law. That's business law. Um
I don't again. None of this
makes any sense to put in a
statute would would makes that
what makes sense. It's just
simply an allowance, that of
nonprofit corporation
established under that prior
history for medicinal purposes
can be converted. And I think
you already say that
If you look at
Uh oh.
Previously you said it has to
comply with certain laws.
That conversion.
There you go online. 16 says the
conversion shall be approved.
Pursuant to an agreement of the
conversion in the manner
provided for the conversion of a
limited liability company under
that section that says it all
right if you want to make this
comes
And I don't see unless you can
persuade me otherwise where we
have to say that for this to
conversion to be valid. It has
to be approved by members of the
board of directors of the
nonprofit and then talking about
what property is, is, um
As part of the conversion and so
forth. Help me doesn't worry.
Why are we trying to put
business and corporate law and
Mr Chair? I think this was put
in just to make sure that there
wasn't one person.
Doing this conversion against
the wishes of of other folks who
legitimately we would have a
say, but I I agree with you. I
think we could process strike
that sentence and
This would this section would
still otherwise served the
primary purpose that it's
intended served,
Um, the last two sentences that
are they're looking at those
There is other law that
prohibits
That license. I understand.
You've already said that
repeatedly up above that, right?
Several lines when you say when
you're authorizing conversion.
Any any time there's a parent or
successor corporation. There's
certain things that occur and
liabilities may or may not be
transferred by that transfer and
assets so forth. So specimen all
this in the statute.
Just makes no sense to me. I
would just 1978.
Everything else to that seems to
be trying to deal with.
Business. Corporate
relationships between members.
Mr Chair. I do think the last
sentence about any action or
proceeding pending against the
converting entity can be
Maybe continued as if the
conversion had not occurred. I
think that's important language
to keep
I have to respectfully
disagreeing. That's always true.
Any action against converting
entity, whether whether there's
a liability of the successor,
entity or not.
It's not going to be determined
by
What
Corporate form with the statute
says it will be by the agreement
of the of the conversion right
and that was the converting
entities will decide whether
that court is going to decide
that.
But you're saying here when you
say any action may be continued.
That's always true, right? And
nothing about the conversion is
going to change that feeling. So
everybody you're authorizing the
proceedings. So again. I just
I think you're muddling.
Germany again because my my
interest is the licensing. And
as you say nothing That's not
our interest.
But
The language there any action or
proceeding pending against the
converting entity may be
continued. I understand you're
what you're saying there
I'm wondering about inserting
after the word against pending
against the license held by
converting entity.
Maybe continued as of right. My
point is the license. I don't
want somebody trying to duck out
from from underneath the type of
Because Mr Chair they might be
like now there are different
controlling person on the
license. I think that makes a
lot of sense that it could be
used to try to try to dodge
May not be able to persuade the
two of you but again.
Yeah, without Senator raised any
action or proceeding against the
converting entity. So so there's
this nonprofit that's existed
and there's an action proceeding
against them. It says it may be
continued as if the conversion
is not occurred that that entity
will no longer exist right Once
there's a conversion made
And so you have to. You have to
have the proceeding change in
some way you'd have to have the
court substitute parties. There
have to be some kind of
substitution or
Or successor liability or
something.
But but the action proceeding
against the convergence
I've got it and, well, I
appreciate your concern with the
license. I do, too. As a as a
practical matter. None of this
really matters because you guys
can suspend a revoked license
any day. You want notice, used
another license right? There's
unlimited licenses.
Any entity can have unlimited
license and anybody can have
unlimited. Not really. I really
don't think you have any
enforcement means at all. When
it comes to a license. I
appreciate you. You want to do
that? But
I don't think we have that in
the wall is that is that fares
that are doing you really? This
is the big difference between
this and alcohol will be
enforcement was always the
threat of losing the license,
which was worth 500,000 set.
And so they made sure their
staff is well trained and make
sure the laws were strictly
enforced and comply with because
they didn't want to lose the
asset. But since we
But no value. You can take my
license and just
It might be license or my wife's
license.
My friends license. Keep right
on, going down the road and Mr
Chair if we don't pass this
bill, yes, but language, the
language we put in this bill
about giving them the ability to
revoke and deny licenses because
of X y Z, uh, that is what's
going to prevent that from
happening If someone has been a
bad actor on one license
That makes them vulnerable to
having all of their licenses
removed.
I get that That's different than
what we're talking about. Right
now. In this part, Yes, I've got
I've got the motion and let's
just see if there's any other
discussion on it, and we'll see
where we go from there. I would
just call this a tightening of
your bills. All I would really
say this does on that proposed
amendment, Emily it's page 23 9
19 striking everything after 19
7.
Um
Okay, right? Yeah.
All right.
Honorable call, please. Yes.
That amendments adopted. Thank
you.
Um
I won't see why is one of the
first things you're doing here.
Senator. That's really times
have just changed so much.
You're adding a new exception to
Ipra, Um, which normally would
have sent the Albuquerque
Journal in the press and media
in years past into orbit from my
experience any time you expand
Abra, they seem to be, um,
docile these days.
That times have changed so much,
but, um, the question about
expanding the exceptions to a
PRA is information online Age
three information developed and
obtained.
By the way licensing during an
enforcement investigation that
triggers gonna be during an
enforcement investigation. In
other words, does that language
modifying this during an
enforcement investigation mean
that the that it's the
information that's gathered
during that investigation that
would be never subject Oprah? Or
would it only is your intention?
Do not have it subject to a PRA
while the enforcement
investigation is ongoing, and if
so,
What's the concern? What are we
worried about here? That would
be different really than
frankly, any other.
Enforcement action and we have
our chief of the state police
here, But I assume that they
never want to have an Ipra
request made for an ongoing
criminal investigation.
And I presume we have the we
don't we have We have an
imperfect Tatchell, don't we,
uh, which would essentially
cover this, wouldn't it?
Mr Chair. No, it wouldn't cover
this. So and we have a law
enforcement records. Exception
that that's various. That's
specific that that does keep
stuff out during the pending
investigation, and that is the
intent of this language is just
while the investigation is
pending, uh, it would not be
public after an investigation is
completed, It would be public
and the reason we need it is
because what we're finding is
that
Someone. Let's say
I see that Senator Morris's Ah,
blatantly breaking the law in
his cannabis entity and I call
CCD F to report it.
And then they call Senator
Morris and say We got this
report about you and Senator
Moore says, Who reported me?
And they have to tell them, um
and it is not
It is not creating an
environment where people feel
safe, reporting bad actions that
they're seeing.
And so at least during an
investigation. We would like
that information to remain
confidential, but after it is
completed, and if we need to add
some words in there to make
clear that this is just for a
while and then yeah, Like I
said, I got to give this one a
lot of positive thought. Because
the example you gave us and I
would be true of any law
enforcement action to think
Tommy ratted me out, and nobody
wants to know.
Who ratted him out, right? Um,
I'm sorry, Mr nobody. And and
you're You're right. If you look
on hte to line 18, we do have
the existing exception report as
provided in 14 2-1 0.2. I don't
know what that is.
Maybe you do Mr Chair. There's a
whole other section in Ipra the
talks specifically about law
enforcement records, where
that's really laid out all the
exceptions for why wouldn't we?
Wouldn't We take teachers that
already implied and just
Consider this part of the
efforts of the cannabis Control
Mr Chair because right now they
don't have law enforcement
powers. If the stand alone bill
that we are bringing to give
them law enforcement powers
passes, then yes, they will be
covered by that existing
exception. But right now, since
they are not law enforcement, it
would not apply to them.
All right. Well, I'm persuaded,
But you're right. I mean,
What? What? I guess what
troubles me most about where
we're at today is what's not in
this bill earlier. I don't see
her here now, but we were right.
We heard about this a great deal
during the pulled something.
Excuse me some things out. I
hope we didn't pull things out
because we
I didn't want to tackle the hard
tasks as you as you pointed out
when you say that there's not an
enforcement law enforcement is
not considered law enforcement
effort. Really, What it comes
down to is
There's no enforcement at all
things that trouble us.
One of the big concerns I had
In the last year was learning
about the
Very large growth facilities
that were rated
With massive law enforcement
responses. Multiple agencies,
helicopters, planes find people
in slave like conditions, right
living.
With
A couple of cups of rice a day.
No have no heating. No cool.
Chinese immigrants mostly
important, And when I heard
about this horrific circumstance
with all of these plants, and
and this this girl farms in the
state when I would talk to the
dream general about it.
My next reaction was what
happened to them, and the answer
was usually nothing so
operating. We don't have any
Authority to do anything about
it.
Paul to hear that right that
slavery like conditions, people
that are not being paid really
massive growth way beyond our
plant counts and all these laws
and just flouting it and the
responses there's nobody
responsible for enforcing this
right. That's what job somebody
said it earlier, they said it
but the sense I got from the
people that are in law
enforcement, otherwise, um, we
didn't create this law. You guys
created it. So you guys figure
out
To deal with it the problems
with it, and we did. We just
didn't have anybody enforcing it
at all. So I was fortunate to
get invited by the train general
to Colorado, where we met with
enforcement there. And you were
there, too. And that was a good
conversation. But, um, they do a
lot to enforce this and we like
yourself.
It's a little bit of a little
bit of an aside to the law
enforcement.
Exception, but I'm gonna gonna
move beyond that. Because I hear
what you're saying, which is we
don't pass.
The other bill that provides for
enforcement. Then you would need
the super except that we give
law enforcement the ability to
so all right. I'm we'll take
I'll take the risk of expanding
apron deal with the
consequences, usually at least
getting pretty nasty Editorial
right from the Jerome perhaps
softening.
Attitude over the years, so I
think they might be drafting
that editorial right now, Mr
Chair, um and all trying to be
quick to the pages, 26 and 27 in
this is I think what you were
talking about earlier, which is
The authority to
Suspended. We we've modified
That without paragraph seven
Yeah.
But again as I understand what
you're telling me center doing
is the the intention here is to
Try and get good conduct from
people by revoking their license
on Mr Chair. So this
circumstance you just described
That's the Denali case where all
this terrible stuff happened and
they couldn't take away the
license. Takeaway license.
That's what we're trying to
address here. We're trying to
make sure that in those
circumstances they can revoke a
license or deny a license.
But help help disabuse him My
concern. So what do you take
away my license? I'm giving you
this scenario and Senator he
wanted to do the I told you so I
would never do that. But But
what I would say, is that a lot
of these things that we're
looking at today we're not only
predictable, but they were
predicted, expressly predicted
these outcomes because we knew
this would happen and one of the
concerns remains with me is
okay. So you're going to enforce
this by revoking my license.
What keeps me from doing what I
just described a woman ago,
which is just getting another
license in a different name. Now
you'll say, Well, I knew Joseph,
You did bad so we're not gonna
let you Joseph have another
license, but
What I want when I do.
Make up your name LLC here. How?
How will you know that you're
gonna revoke or suspected by if
you don't know it's me.
So, Mr Mr Chair. There's a
concept called of controlling
person in the Cannabis
Regulation Act that is
specifically trying to get at
that. And so if that's someone
who has a financial or voting
interests of at least 10% in an
entity, Uh then they have to be
disclosed as a controlling
person on the application so you
could create a new L L. C.
But you are still controlling
person, uh, behind that LLC and
therefore have to be disclosed.
Mr Chairman as England's
officers and directors of
corporations or partnerships,
Partners are so proprietors of
those corporate entities
actually pointed out, you know,
in regards to the cases your
particular situation with the we
did pursue administrative action
and are continuing to pursue
those cases to the greatest
extent we have, which is to
vocalize singer and to seek
fines for But that's
All we had
Otherwise they were looking at
misdemeanor disagreed to at
least the extent that, um they
could have pursued misdemeanor
offenses. That's a key part of
why this bill also has felony
crimes being created a
ratcheting imposed penalties We
recognize we need both, and I
appreciate that in, um I am I
describing to the committee and
to the public at large,
accurately. What happened was
she had a massive presence on
force Mint.
Arrayed. Um, you found? What do
you say 30,000 oval Legal limit
and
They continue to do business The
next day. We've done everything
we can with the law the way it
is for right now, Senator. This
bill is so critical and I know
you're staying late and working,
and I certainly agree. And I
once again I
Again. Good.
Response, but hopefully one
really kind of sad It was. We
did everything we could. But the
answer to my question is they
open for business the next day,
and so that that certainly makes
true this log needs some
changes. It also should reflect
the fact that
I'll leave it there so
I hope I hope you all will find
a way considered hope you'll
continue to work with this
language and this one section
because again one of the
creative things I do as a
lawyers to figure out how to get
around the laws. Um and you all
are all smiling and not you know
how that works out. I would. I
wouldn't have any trouble
getting around the law you just
some of us are very familiar
with how Shell corporations are
created. Subsidiary parent
corporations created all to
avoid laws, really tax laws and
We have to do is pick up the
newspaper every day to figure
out how some of them
Maybe the wealthiest people in
the country and have evaded tax
laws by creative
But keeping tax accounting and
Maybe in New York. They're going
to get held to account for it,
but they got away with it
adequately ambiguous about that.
I don't want to get sued for
defamation have to pay eighties
million dollars. But alright, um
thank you.
I just a couple of just quickly
sides and that's when we're
done. Page 38. You're talking
about the packaging. And so we
think that's so important here.
I'll just I'll just share with
all of you in the years leading
up to the legalization of
marijuana and New Mexico. I made
it a practice over the years to
go to other states and other and
look at how they were doing.
some of these things in Canada
and Quebec three or four years
ago I went into one of their
dispensaries there, too. Bad
center pearls. Not here.
In that Canada where it's legal.
It's it's a government
controlled market that the
government does the sales. They
run the dispensaries. They do
the whole thing I went in there
and asked to see what's over
their products look like, um,
and they do not sell anything
resembling gummies or anything
candy like because they consider
marijuana to be a drug, um, for
medicinal purposes and and for
recreational purposes, Of
course.
But but they don't They don't
allow Candies and we could spend
another session We could spend
another special session probably
improving on all this, but I
know the hours late, So alright.
I'm done with my comments,
Center Ivy Soto. Thank you very
much. Mr Chairman, Chairman, I
will be brief and I apologize
for having been out of the room
for so long. I was stuck in
another committee.
So when I hit something ah, in
the bill that I had flagged if
it's already been dealt with by
the videos, please. The first
issue I'd like to actually, and
I suspect it's already but that
is the pro exception just talked
about okay.
Ah!
I'll just move on. Ah, In that
case, we move on. We had some
concerns. We didn't at all.
I'm not now we'll talk with the
sponsor more about it on the
floor. Okay? And I'll just let
me just let me just indicate
real quick. My part of my
concern. I indicated this in a
hearing over the interim part of
my concern is having something
that is specific.
To a particular act in Ipra
itself. If you look at the
exceptions, exceptions
Tend to be, for the most part.
General exceptions.
And so if this is the exception
that is desired, then I think
this exception should be on page
51, and the language could just
be ported over to page 51.
Which is the inspection, public
records language in the
Catalyst Control Act.
And and so that so that you can
just simply say everything is
subject to Oprah other than
If we're doing an investigation
And and and and it would work as
a specific matter there.
However, I'd rather suspect
every investigatory agency.
Would appreciate not having
their early investigations.
subject temperature There is a
greater issue there.
And we did cover this. Uh, we
did cover this fair enough.
Um, but if it's if it's if it's
not going to be changed there,
though,
Like I said, it really ought to
be moved to page 51.
And I'll be happy to help with
that tonight or or or I can just
ignore that tonight at the
sponsor's heard quite a bit of
discussion about it already
think she'll take Mr Carroll
just say we put it here because
I have heard you say at least 12
times in committee. I don't like
it, brah exceptions scattered
throughout our statutes. I like
them there, So I think that's
the better approach. Yeah, and
and and and Mr. But I'll just
say that if it's specific to
particular act, the problem is
It ends up being
Code.
And if that's what we want to do
throughout the all of the
everything we can do that
But otherwise it's something we
should take a look at it anyway.
Uh, I do want to look at pages
26 and 27.
Uh and, uh and so on page 20.
Six. I'm looking specifically
online, 19 and, uh, just educate
me to make sure that I
I'm reading this correctly or
that I that I see it, and that
is
Ah, I get the felony indictment
or conviction, but a pending
investigation pending
investigation.
By whom? Mr Chair. I think
that's going to depend on the
circumstance. So we discussed
this. So this is designed to
address the situation like the
one that chair was discussing
the Denali case where there was
the human trafficking with the
Chinese immigrants where we
don't have a conviction.
At this point, I don't even know
I assume that there's an
indictment, but I don't know,
but we do know that this is
someone who we do not want to
continue to be an actor in our
market.
So this is
To address situations just like
that.
And Mr Chairman, You know one of
the things that Senator Morris
Uh, has done a lot of work on
Uh, in the church.
Right has been in terms of
people who have a past.
Uh, and has been in terms of
making sure that
Uh, within R L D.
The boards have to put up front
on their website.
What felonies will disqualify
you so people know and it's not
arbitrary.
And the and and so simply by
putting a pending investigation.
Um, I mean, that doesn't say
whether it's criminal
investigation ministrations
investigation That doesn't say
what kind of investigation
And that is, I think that is
Almost so broad as to be void
for vagueness the way that it's
written there.
Um, And and so I really do think
that that that that requires
Uh, a little bit more position
to be added instead of simply a
pending investigation.
Because I don't know what kind
of investigation that refers to
And and I don't think the public
that refers to
Uh And I think what the sponsor
just said is, we don't know what
kind of person that that that
refers to, but we want to be
able to have the flexibility to
pick and choose which spending,
which investigations that would
that would
That would that we would make
applicable here.
So regulatory
Question of licensure. I think
that's a problem.
And I would yield to Senator
Worth.
No, Mr Chair we already center
There was a section Well, so my
next thing was actually that
that I think I think Paragraph
seven should be strong. We
already we already did that.
Okay, Fair enough.
Um, the, um, although I do
appreciate for a moment. Great
minds think alike. I mean, you
know you You think that you have
been in here in the committee
for the so It's no. I mean, I
mean, that's necessarily it's
useful when different lawyers
come in with the same
conclusions and same issues. It
should go.
Especially
And and then and then just the
last thing Miss German. It's a
It's A It's a technical issue,
but it's on page 45. We spent a
lot of time on pages 44 and 45.
I don't I don't want to revisit
anything. However, given the
amendments that we did
Um, the sentence that begins on
pay online, 15 to page 45.
Ah!
As it stands right now.
Um, touch is is not clear. First
of all.
Now that now that now that we've
struck, uh, the first part of
that sentence
And Mr Chair, Senator. All of
that struck all all that says
now is the provision of the
fourth tracked apply.
Period, Okay?
We do? We don't Okay, so we
don't so we struck to the
seizure, forfeiture and
disposal? Yep. Okay. Very good.
Uh, so but nonetheless.
The that should be its own
subsection, however, because
otherwise a person trafficking
under 21 that provision of the
forfeit track would not apply.
Mm. Mr Chair, Senator. My
understanding is the provision
of the fourth attract apply
again. We discussed this.
Whether we say that or not.
Forfeiture act. It's not only
applying to this by virtue of
the fact that we are saying it
here. We left that language in
as I paying to law enforcement
and prosecutors. Uh
To give them more motivation to
pursue these cases and
understood, Mr Chairman. If you
say it's specifically here under
a person over 21, and you don't
say it for a person under 21, it
would only apply to person over
21 if you simply put a
subsection number in front of
it. It would clearly apply to
the entire
Entire section. That's all I'm
saying is, just make it
subsection. Eat that one
sentence.
I would, I would. I would
suspect that that would be a
friendly amendment to make
better sexually. I would ask
that you consult with the
general counsel. Right? Mr.
Chair. I think it's fine if
Senator episode wants to make
that its own subsection. I think
that's fine.
And the agency would not ever
problem with believe it will be
actually subsection F if you
Online, 50 whatever whatever the
next letter would be. I think
with the re lettering, it would
be
Right?
Okay. Okay. Whatever the next
letter would be.
So, yeah, so
Anyway, so I would I would move
to make
Make that that that sentence its
own subsection.
And there's nobody needs to re
letter afterwards. Um so that's
I'll make that as a mushroom
doing. Okay? That's fine. And
then the last thing Mr Chairman
with with with regard to the
forfeiture act
Uh, there's a little secrecy in
the forfeiture act actually.
Which is that all property is
returned.
Uh, two people after words. Uh,
and I suspect if there's not a
conviction.
And I suspect we don't want to
return this stuff.
Two people and however, there is
a provision specific to firearms
that overrides that.
And that is in 31-27 Dash 7.1.
It's it is, uh, subsection age,
it says seize property that is
firearms, ammunition or
explosive subject to forfeiture.
Under the protections of this
section that is not returned to
an innocent owner shall be
destroyed upon a motion by the
law enforcement and so unless if
there's no conviction, we want
to be returning returning.
The product to people.
Um
And and you may want not want to
do this on the fly, but, uh you
either either ought to put in an
additional subsection.
Uh, to that to 31. That's 27-7
0.1 or some other amendment to
the forfeiture act to make sure
that if there's no conviction
that we destroy that we have a
little bonfire Cobra, shall we
say?
Ah of the of the product of any
product that is seized so that
it doesn't proposed amendment
specifically.
Um
Uh, Mr Chairman. The hour is
late.
Uh huh. And I'm flagging the
issue. I suspect there are other
issues that were flagged as this
moves on flagging this issue for
the sponsor for her to be a
wind, so I'm happy to anything
else. Nothing else.
The objection to the Mr Chair. I
just wonder. Do we want to roll
this out as a committee sub as
we generally do when we've done
a lot of amendments to start
The objection to the Mr Chair. I
just wonder. Do we want to roll
this out as a committee sub as
we generally do When we've done
a lot of amendments, Stewart
it do not pass us in those six
and a do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate those six to
incorporate all of the
amendments will be a 0.5 essay.
Thank you. Is there any
objection to the before? We were
gone. Thank you very much. I
regret that I kept you all
longer than my target is going
to happen here to try and give
you target times. Please
remember, we have a commitment
as a committee tomorrow. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
