right right but I do see that
you do have in.
This bill is.
A definition or something.
So.
I think that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill forward
and.
Remember some of the bills
passed and just really happy
that they we have a starting
place very clear this is no.
Solution but so good job by
coming up with this but I do
have a question with the
implementation of this so
there's some concern in the FIR
about what how who is going to
do this is there proper funding
under what agency will this
person be so my understanding is
it's probably the livestock
board it is that you know is it
just one person one of FTE that
that handles this a new position
in and the livestock bordered
like how do you how's this going
to work implementation wise and
real granular level.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator o'neill I guess so I
think by the time to address the
the the the funding side by the
time the FIR was issued and the
junior bill exercise came
through I think they missed each
other
so Senator Representative
McQueen and I are both
contributing a hundred seventy
five thousand dollars total to
get the first year to get the
first year done for this and
director garlands livestock
board they are going to be
identifying the our expert or
experts and I would like to
offer heard gives of a some more
background to answer your
question.
Thank you center madam chair
Senator o'neill
So as just a preliminary thought
on how this is going to work we
have not asked for an FTP in
order to fulfill the job
requirements of this what we've
been told is that we will do a
study we are not arrange
Management Agency however we do
work closely with an NDA and
university in Los crucis so what
we this money will be utilized
to work with some range
management specialist out of the
university to set up some
guidelines on how this person
should actually function and
what qualifications they should
carry and then we will oversee
the licensure of it where these
people can contract with us and
for example Sandoval County in
order to.
I I think give some guidance on
some possible relocations
population control and just
May humane management of these
horses that that's our
preliminary thoughts on this is
the Senate your question thank
you and in in here with the
livestock board
Madam chair Senator now yes I'm
the executive director of
livestock thank you now that's
great and QTS to both of you for
using House Bill junior which is
awesome.
You know towards this this very
important issue thanks.
Have.
Senator are.
Yes Representative.
Yes
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Fifty seven yes you have to do
thank you thank you thank you
madam chair thank you committee
members.
And that we will continue with
us on a bill to seventy one.
For for the next.
Thank you to me.
Yeah.
But I believe one is on her way
there she gets here we'll we'll
get.
All.
And the.
Will again.
The US.
Madam chair members of the
committee of Senate bill one of
six has actually been heard in
past years and it passed the
Senate for unanimously it went
through house committees and did
not get heard on the house floor
if specifically asked that
pharmacists and physicians
assistants be included in the
definition of health care
practitioners for the purposes
of the non compete clause and I
do have an amendment madam chair
that the committee has to also
add the psychologist after we
got through the first committee
the psychologist came forward
and asked to be included so with
me today.
I have two expert witnesses we
can make this as short or as
long as you want.
It could be very short since it
went through here in the past I
have with me deal Tinker and
also for the the pharmacists and
Lisa long for the physician's
assistants and I don't know who
is here for the psychologists
but you do have a one line ma'am
efforts to add the psychologist.
