center, so we may have a
problem, but we have heard your
bill previously, so we'll start
with it again and take up where
we left off. Senator Munoz said
at 2:25. Welcome to everybody in
the committee today.
Good. So we do have an amendment
that strips the uh page 12
starts at line 22, strips the
4th degree felony, takes that
completely out.
And with that we'll stand for
questions.
Some debate and discussion,
we'll go back to it though, uh,
with the proposed amendment.
First of all, we I guess we need
to move the amendment and so and
act on the amendment, right,
Senator Dukes move the
amendment. Senator Munoz has
explained it. Questions on the
amendment, if any.
Anyone, any objection to
adopting the amendment?
Amendments adopted, the bill as
amended. Anyone
do pass asended 225.
Right. So you're still gonna,
uh, thank you, Senator. Anything
else right now? No. So your bill
is still gonna increase
penalties on littering.
Yes, sir.
What else?
I make me open it back up.
Uh, late improperty to lane
changes, right?
And uh dumping.
I
And graffiti.
Yeah, 11 version of your bill
had you increasing penalties all
the way across the board that
are we still back to that?
All right.
That, well, that's the one you
kind of introduced and then you,
I think maybe pulled back, is
that right? So now we're just
doing strictly.
Lane
And start feeding and
throwing trash out of a window,
right?
And you're gonna take the fine
for trash out of the window from
what to what?
I think it's from 50 to 2000.
15. Who's, who's your expert?
Which one?
The guy who you have to ask
questions of
quite your bill.
Go uh chair members committee,
Alex Rodriguez of New Mexico
State police.
So, I'm just kind of curious
how, how frequently do you guys
actually uh stop people for
littering. Also, there's,
there's a couple of different
statutes we use. One of the
statutes we use, um, primarily
when someone's driving on the
highway is, is essentially um
throwing injus material on the
on the roadway, which can cover
littering from a motor vehicle,
um, but that is, uh, a, uh, uh
section 66 statute in the Motor
Vehicle Code. This one is
specifically for liter, so that
would cover.
Say I was walking past your
property and I threw trash over
the fence on your property.
That, that motor vehicle statute
won't cover that. So this
statute, the littering statute
specifically covers if I'm
walking around and I'm walking
past your property and I throw
trap over the fence or trash bag
over your fence that would allow
me to cite that person for
littering, um, whereas at 66
statute, the injurious materials
on the roadway, um, would not.
OK. Which, which is the one
we're increasing. This would be
the littering statute. So
essentially, if I'm walking past
your property and I throw, throw
trash over the fence or if I'm
walking down the side of the
road and I throw trash off off
the side of the path or
whatever, um, it would cover
that. Yeah, and I don't mean
this in any way disrespectfully,
but do you guys actually ever do
this? Do you actually site and
charge people for for those kind
of crimes, yeah, absolutely,
yes. OK.
Uh
All right. That's all the
questions that we've got. We got
to do pass motion. Any other
questions?
Same then Moos with do pass to,
oh, nope, nope, oh no, we do
not. I thought all right, sorry
about that. Sorry. Did you, were
you, were you, were you on the
debate?
Question
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
quick question. So you struck
section 4.
Which was it said penalty for
criminals.
Um
So right now, do you, are you
including all the traffic, the
lane issues as well in this
bill, changing or of lanes. It
had a section here.
Page 7, you still have all the
penalties regarding improper
laying.
The others, is that still you'd
mentioned just graffiti and, and
is that all been removed now?
No, that's not being removed at
all. Don't think it was removed
was the eagle dump illegal
dumping where it makes it a
felony. OK.
OK.
OK.
I just want to make sure I
understood what was removed and
what wasn't. So, so the
increasing the penalty for
improper use of a travel lane is
still in there.
OK.
Well, I sometimes
Play in the left lane for a
while when I'm driving, not
paying attention, so I could get
penalized for that, I guess. My
wife's always accusing me of
moving, moving over. So I'm glad
she's not in the law enforcement
because she would uh
She would penalize me for that.
So let the word go forth, uh
Senator Munoz has made I-40
safe, you got to drive 65, and
if you're in the wrong lane to
travel, you're gonna get uh
additional uh
What's that?
Oh yeah,
yeah, I'm just trying to add to
the debate, but yeah, it's so uh
like I said, and, and of course,
my, my, my objective all along
has been since Senormiosis
reduced the speed limit on I-40,
that'll drive more traffic and
trucking to I-10 as the
alternative, and that's good for
economic development and
business in my part of the
state, so, uh, I'm all for
driving more business to the
south. Um, so I will support
this bill as part of a recuring
effort to keep truckers from
going through Gallup, so.
all others, uh, no more
questions. Senator We set of
questions. All right, is there
any objection to the DuP pass
motion, Senator Dewey.
So worth, so Thornton.
And that's it. You have to do
pass.
Thank you very narrowly, Senator
Paul, congratulations you finish
your ice cream before it melts.
Yes.
I know a number of you all are
here on 318, which is the bill
that I'm sponsoring, we rolled
that over from the last meeting
and then, and in fairness, I
would start there again as we
did with Senator Munoz, but I'm
gonna ask all of you to stay put
with me, um, and we'll do Senate
Bill 250. I think most of the
people in the room are here on
that bill, so we'll hear Senate
Bill 250, Senator, that's yours.
Mhm
OK
Colleagues, I'm told there's a
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute, I would alert you to
that and ask for an appropriate
motion on
Um, what it looks like Twitter
728.1. Senator Maest, is that
right? Do we have a committee
stuff?
Yes.
Are you sure?
Is it this year what he said,
OK.
From this term when I move it do
not pass the Senate Bill 250,
but for purposes of discussion,
they do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 250.
This is, uh, we've got
Looks like 4 individuals who
have signed up in support, do we
have anybody signed in
opposition
no opposition. Maesters are the
following individuals part of
your presentation, uh, or not,
please, Diana Bustillos Hermia
Sotelo Jorge Rodriguez and Mary
Ellen Garcia by Zoom are those
part of your presentations?
Only Ms. Garcia. OK.
All right. I'm going to ask you
to limit your presentation then
to 10 minutes, center, uh,
between you and Ms. Garcia.
And then that will allow me to
the other individuals who
registered and support, so 10
minutes please, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
honorable members, uh, Senate
Bill 250 deals with law
enforcement. This is a law, uh,
public safety bill and arguably
one of the strongest public
safety bills we have. It
regulates uh local law
enforcement and ensures that
scarce resources and our police
officers and sheriffs on the
ground are focused on our
communities, our focused on
allegations of, of crime,
traffic, and everything that
entails they're very complicated
jobs. This bill would
prohibit local law enforcement
from uh coordinating with uh the
federal government's uh
deportation policies and
immigration policies. So we
would ask that the committee
adopt uh or pass rather the
committee substitute, um.
What this does is it will, uh,
Prohibit the use of public
funds.
Personnel
Property equipment or other
resources.
For the purpose of identifying,
detecting, apprehending,
arresting, detaining, or
prolonging the detention.
Uh, of, of someone who's who is
is is being suspected of not
being born in the United States.
Um.
The federal government is gonna
do what the federal government
does.
And, and we're not judging that
program at this time, but we're
saying we do not need some of
our smaller law enforcement
agencies throughout the state
spending valuable hours and
valuable resources, uh,
assisting the federal
government. There is no law that
uh in that, that makes a state
or local governments, uh,
participate in the federal
program. There is no need to
panic out about perspective
funding sources from the federal
government, uh, or anything like
that.
but this is a policy question
geared towards public safety,
uh, the, uh, the committee
substitute, um.
Mr. Chairman makes it clear that
we're not dealing with
immigration centers, uh, and
this, this, this bill draws the
line at county jails and state
prisons. We're only dealing with
officers on the field because
every hour an officer is there.
On a routine traffic stop trying
to figure out where a person was
born is an hour that they're not
investigating a residential
burglary is an hour that they're
not, um, maybe pulling over uh
unimpaired driver who's risking
lives on the, on the street an
hour that they're not
investigating a homicide in
which a dear loved one has been
taken from our community an hour
that that they're not uh
apprehending uh criminal
warrants issued by any court in
this state. So we do not want
any hour.
removed from the task at hand,
which is improving public safety
in this state. It's uh probably
the number one agenda item by
the folks back home is public
safety, public safety, public
safety, and Senate Bill 250 is
is in interest of public safety.
With that, I'll turn over to
sponsor senator turnout.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members, and thank you,
Senator. Uh, very, uh, happy to
be here with you all today,
co-sponsoring Senate Bill 250,
uh, members, chairman, 1 in 10
New Mexicans is an immigrant and
more than 100,000 New Mexico
born children live in immigrant
households. This mixed status
community should have the same
access to police fire and other
public safety services without
fear of being turned over to
immigration authorities and
separated from their families. I
come from one of those
families.
We also know that state and
local agencies that divert
limited local resources to
helping enforce federal
immigration laws, jeopardize
public safety, prevent victims
and witnesses from coming
forward and erode trust in the
immigrant community, making it
less likely to participate in
community policing efforts.
This bill will not limit or
prevent law enforcement
officials from arresting a
person who has been charged with
a crime. If an undocumented
person is arrested for a crime,
he or she will be held
accountable by the justice
system and it will also not
prevent local jails from
detaining immigrant residents
arrested for criminal offenses.
With that, I will yield.
We have a couple of experts to
help us answer questions, um,
Mr. Chairman, and then Ms.
Garcia, and then that's the end
of our presentation.
Uh, we also had, as I said, in 3
other individuals who asked to
speak and registered and support
I'll recognize each of them for
one minute. We're still within
the time for advocacy, Diana
Bustillos, are you here?
Mr. Boilos, you come on up and
Mia Sotelo, are you here?
You come up behind her,
Rodriguez.
You hear?
Jorge Rodriguez, no.
Right. And you said we had, we
had Mary Ellen Garcia on Zoom,
and she still, she's still
there?
All right, so, um, Ms. Garcia
will recognize you first, ma'am,
and then we'll go to the others
in the room. Miss Garcia.
No, no, no, Miss Garcia on Zoom
first.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mary Ellen Garcia, CEO
of the New Mexico Coalition
Against Domestic violence, and
on behalf of our 32 domestic
violence providers, we stand
before you today, um, in strong
support of Senate Bill 250. This
is not a bill, uh, not just
about policy, it's about public
safety, trust in our
institutions, and ensuring that
all the Mexicans can access law
enforcement without fear. It
ensures that local law
enforcement can focus on
protecting their communities.
Rather than being co-opted into
federal immigration enforcement.
This bill keeps families
together, strengthens the trust
between law enforcement and our
immigrant communities, and
Senate Bill 250 is a critical
step towards ensuring that every
New Mexican, regardless of their
immigration status can access
emergency services, report
crime, and seek assistance
without fear. Our communities
are safer when trust between our
local agencies and our immigrant
families remains strong,
diverting local resources to
federal immigration laws, not
only undermines public
safety, but also drains critical
funding from essential services.
This bill reaffirms to the
public that public safety should
serve all residents in New
Mexico. Again, we stand in
strong support of this piece of
legislation.
Diana Bustillos, you have up to
one minute, ma'am, please.
That
That's true.
When presidents yesterday
testimon companera
bres Hernandez soyosae Mexico el
testimonio demi companera terres
Hernandez.
Min nombres Hernandez
soyorguyosae Mexican immire
metrajos unsandoujove
Min nombres Hernandez
soyorguyosae Mexican immire
metrajos unsandoujo
so in Madre the onlyjo itos it
has quesonaiddos and estepais
Albuquerque is no estrogarsomiro
del centro queerro expressar que
oses estoyosar travajo de estado
actual mediretaurarla Pintura de
los automobiles and
negocio familia junto esposo
estamosoguosos dra la
culturalima de este pais
aquienuevo Mexico avemos muchas
gentravajadoas que colaboramos
enconomia ilasemos con mucho guo
ademas pagamons in psale
cadanoiremosqueno
estrososeutilli paramejoar no
estro estado in todo
loscentidos.
Desa forumsa fortunadamente a
muchos de la
that immigranteennoso ungramma
ban minist constantmente
escuchamosasa sobre de
portaciones maibas asianotros.
Hermia Sotelo.
however you want to do it.
She's recognized for a minute,
reading the testimony for Ms.
Teresa Hernandez. I am partly
Mexican and a mother I'm sorry,
are you?
Oh, I'm sorry, I thought.
It's like.
OK, how are you gonna do this?
Is she gonna speak or you
translate or what are you gonna
do?
You were translating for the,
you're translating for the last
speaker? Oh.
Um, OK. Go ahead, let me, let me
hear the translation very
quickly, please.
And some of the members may not
have followed.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr.
President. This is Diana
Bustillos reading testimony for
Teresa Hernandez. I am partly
Mexican and a mother, my mother
brought me to the United States
when I was very young. I am a
mother of one son and two
daughters who were born in this
country. Albuquerque has been
our home for more than 30 years,
and I am a member of El Centro.
I want to express that just like
many of you here today, I am
proud to contribute to the
state's economy through my work.
I currently store automotive
paint in our family businesses
alongside my husband, and we
take pride in having learned the
culture and language of this
country. Here in New Mexico
there are many.
hardworking people like us who,
uh, contribute to the economy
with great pride. We also pay
our taxes probably every year
and want the resources to be
used to improve our state in
every way.
Uh, unfortunately, many of us in
the immigration community
immigrant community are facing a
serious issue with the new
administration.
Uh, as we currently hear threats
of massive mass deportation
against us. Thank you. Thank you
for the translation, Miss
Sotero.
Good afternoon, Chairman and
members of the community. Uh, my
name is Ermila Sotelo and I'm a
member of Somos Pueblo Nido, a
worker and immigrant rights
organization and organizes in 8
counties across New Mexico, 7 of
which are rural, including Lee
and Eddie County, I have lived
in Artesia for 21 years and come
from an oil and gas family. My
husband and two sons work in the
field.
Right now in Chavez County,
community members are being
stopped by traffic violations
and then detained by ice. This
targeting not only the disrupt
families but also creates fear
and distrust between our
communities and local law
informants SB 250 will ensure
that state resources are not
used to aid federal immigration
informants limiting
collaboration.
Between eyes and local law
enforcement.
This is critical because trust
in law enforcement is essential
for public safety.
I urge you to support SB 250 so
that all the New Mexicans
regardless of their background
can live and work without fear.
Thank you. Miller, that
completes the presentation that
we have registered, but we'll go
to members of the committee,
questions and comments.
Yeah.
I
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I'm, I'm, uh, obviously
deeply disturbed by this bill
and, and if I'm gonna be one, I
would say this is just an
anti-Trump bill.
That's how I interpret.
Um, we know that, uh, Trump won.
Um, electoral vote. He won the
popular vote.
And um his primary mission was
to secure our border. Everybody
knows that. That's why he won.
And so when I see this bill come
before us.
It's like, we're just going to
put a slap in his face and let
him know that New Mexico is a
sanctuary's day. That's how I
interpret this bill.
Um
This bill reaffirms to the
public that New Mexico is a
sanctuary state.
We have an open border.
We know we have drug and human
trafficking going on.
On a consistent basis. I've had
several conversations with the
district attorney of
Albuquerque.
Who has informed me that we are
the human trafficking capital of
the country.
That's occurring.
At our southern border.
And so, when I see a bill that
comes before us like this, it's
just saying,
We don't care.
What the federal government's
going to do, we're not going to
work with them.
To eliminate those problems in
our society.
Um
So section one basically says
that, uh,
Prolonging the detention of a
person based on a suspicion or
knowledge that the person has
entered or is residing in the
United States in violation of
federal immigration laws.
Suspicion is one thing.
Knowledge says, I know.
I know specifically that this
person
is an illegal
immigrant.
And now you're saying that our
law enforcement can't act upon
that, can't share that
information.
Can't can't tell custom and
Border Patrol can't support the
integration and customs
enforcement, that they are not
allowed by this law to even talk
to them about this particular
person who was here illegally.
Um
I think most disturbing for me
is the fact that in section 3,
You actually repeal.
What's called the Federal law
enforcement Assistance Act.
Which permits all state and
local law enforcement agencies
to participate.
And federal law enforcement
assistance.
So not only are you saying we're
not gonna do it, we're gonna get
rid of that wall that basically
allows them to do it.
So you are more than stopping
and facing.
Of our federal government, you
are basically saying,
We don't care what the federal
government does. You're not
gonna get any help from us.
That's how this bill is being
interpreted and this is how this
bill will be interpreted by
everybody outside of New Mexico.
I know you're waiting for a
question.
It's understandable that
That our state and local law
enforcement does not support or
does not work immigration law.
There is a dichotomy there and
there is a separation.
But I think when we're dealing
with cartels, and we're dealing
with human trafficking, we're
dealing with drugs.
Cooperation between law
enforcement agencies is
essential.
And this bill is saying we're
not gonna play.
And I think that's where I have
the biggest problem with that.
So I'm gonna ask you just one
question.
Tell me why this bill.
Should be passed.
We'll, we'll both answer that,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Thornton, thank you.
We're one of the poorest states
in the country.
We are understaffed.
In our law enforcement
community, my hometown.
Cities equivalent to my
hometown's population have some
in the neighborhood of 13, 1400
police officers.
My hometown has about 858.
Depending on what day you ask,
with only less than 250 out on
the field at any given time.
If, if
If it were to spend 15% of its
manpower, helping the federal
government with its program.
Uh, that would be, you know, the
equivalent of having $700.
And having almost 200 officers
in the field. This is a question
of scarce resources.
Uh
We must have our police
deal with public safety.
Every, as, as the only former
prosecutor in the
In the Senate
I've devoted my career to
bring up those scarce resources.
When I first got here, police
could arrest somebody for owing
$10 to Metro Court. To me, that
was a
Complete waste of time.
Complete waste of scarce
resources. Um,
And this is similar to that, if
This bill, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Thornton does not prohibit at
all.
The scenarios that you
mentioned.
Dealing with human trafficking,
dealing with uh drug
trafficking, uh, dealing with
any type of criminal activity
that anybody may be involved in
will be enhanced.
When police officers are not.
Uh, assisting the feds on on its
federal program with regards to
this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That's all I have, Mr. Chan.
Mr. Chair, so I'll just note
that this is, this is a state's
rights issue.
Uh
It's
I'm always kind of entertained
when
Our friends on, on the right
side of the, the chamber.
Really care about states rights
issues in some areas, but, but
not others, um, and so I think
That that is an appropriate, is
appropriate for New Mexico to
assert itself and its rights,
uh, as a state, and to make
policies that are in line with
our values as a state. So,
I,
I understand, Senator Thornton's
concerns and, and I understand
your perspective. Um,
But I
I think that
It just says concept the, the,
the principles of, of states'
rights apply in, in all other
areas, they apply equally when
it comes to immigration.
That's all.
And
So.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So I,
uh,
certainly remember this bill.
It's been around for many years,
I think 2011, uh, Richard
Martinez carried it. I'm curious
about, can you just section 3,
repeals 291-10, originally when
this bill was introduced, we
were amending 2129-1-10, so it's
kind of been restructured, and
I'm just curious.
Kind of what the thinking is and
whether that, and it's somewhat
an unfair question because that
goes all the way back to when it
was first done. Originally, it
was just a mending 291-10, but
now we're completely repealing
it. I guess my question is, does
that repeal?
And what else does that impact
other than immigration law?
Right.
OK.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, Senator Wirth,
the federal law enforcement
Assistance Act of 1965 is an
obsolete law. It was replaced by
many different laws around
immigration and immigration
enforcement and so that was, I
believe, just a cleanup. So, uh,
there are other laws on the
books that will not be impacted
that allow that kind of federal
law enforcement assistance and
cooperation.
So yeah, so that's, that's
really the question of the
federal law enforcement
Assistance Act of 1965. That's
what we're talking about and
that you're saying.
I obsolete, number 12, even if
it was still around, it only
addressed immigration.
Or did it apply to other areas.
I would note in the title, it
says repealing and obsolete
federal reference. So that's
consistent, assuming that's,
that's the case, and it is.
Referring to a federal law,
public law in 98 197. So this is
a little bit interesting. I'm
just curious what was in there
cause I said Thornton flags.
You know, we are changing that,
but if it's an obsolete law
that's
that doesn't even apply anyway.
That's the, that's the question.
What, what, what exactly is
this? That's what I'm trying to
figure out.
Germanman Cervantes Senator
Worth, thank you for that
question.
I just had to find it in my
notes, so the federal law
enforcement assist assistance
Act of 1965 is no longer in
effect in its original form, and
it originally in 65 laid the
groundwork for federal
assistance to state and local
law enforcement, but it was
largely superseded by letter
later legislation in 1968, uh,
and in many other forms, 2002,
1994, and so there are all these
other uh federal laws that allow
for different kinds.
Of assistance to local and state
law enforcement that are not
impacted by the repeal of that.
I, I again, I do believe in the
drafting. It was just a matter
of cleaning up the language and
not referring to a bill or to a
law that is no longer in effect.
Yeah sure I just know I'm, I'm
looking at the.
2011 version of this, and we
actually went into 291-10
deleted.
The one sentence that was there,
and then basically put the rest
of this statute into that
statutory section, which is just
trying to figure out exactly
what was happening here, so, uh,
and that's what I have. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senators. Which specific local
agencies or state agencies are
expending resources today.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brantley,
um, thanks for that question.
It's, it's hard to know which
are utilizing resources today,
what we know is that there are
over 2 dozen jurisdictions
between cities and counties that
already have a version of this
policy on the books, and they've
had it on the books for many
years and it's, and it's been
working.
Witness in part because local
law enforcement as well as uh
domestic violence, uh, providers
or domestic violence service
providers and sexual assault
service providers have sort of
come together to to make that
work and so, uh, it's about 22
jurisdictions that have it on
the books, and uh the rest of
the jurisdictions don't. And so
we know, for instance, that we
don't know if they have policies
that
are proactively working, but we
do know that they don't have
policies that would prohibit the
use of local resources and
today, uh, someone mentioned
that in Chavez County, for
instance, there is collaboration
with the local county sheriff's
office and the local jail on
civil immigration, uh,
violations with ICE, and so we
do know that there
Our pockets of New Mexico where
there is that kind of
collaboration. This would just
create a more uniform standard
policy that would coincide with
a lot of the policies that
already exist in, in mostly
urban areas of New Mexico and in
some northern New Mexico
communities like Taos and uh Ria
Riba and Espaniola and San
Miguel.
So, Mr. Chairman, senators, if I
understand that, this makes this
just nothing more than a
messaging bill. If the only
agency that you're aware of.
It is enforcing immigration as
Chavez County.
Can you name a single state
agency or any other municipality
or any other county.
That you're trying to prohibit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator.
No, we're trying to prove the
entire state.
County governments change, city
governments change, sheriffs
change, police chiefs should
change, personnel change,
workers at MBD change we're,
we're prohibiting it statewide.
We're not picking on any
particular county or any
particular jurisdiction. I, uh,
but it's just, it's just a waste
of time and resources. I heard a
story today by one of the
advocates, Mr. Chairman Braley,
that this young man was pulled
over for speeding. I'm not
questioning the validity of the
stop.
He was detained.
Uh, questioned and about an hour
later it was determined that
that he may in fact be
undocumented, and he was then
arrested, uh, turned over to
ice, so, uh, the oil patch, he
was on his way to work at the
oil patch. So the oil patchs
lost a worker, uh, for a day or
forever, uh, and that was an
hour that that
The government agent was
spending
On a federal program as opposed
to
Doing what he was tasked to do,
which is
Provide public safety for that
local area. But there's
individuals acting out.
There's
Departments, there's agencies,
but we just don't know who they
are because we're getting
reports sporadically, but I
couldn't, I couldn't give you a
map of what counties, what
governments, what
jurisdictions are doing what.
And Mr. President, Senator, you
said it's a waste of time and
resource. I, I think that's what
I wanna know. You'd be surprised
to know I'm not disagreeing. I,
I think it's important to know
what is the resources that are
being expended and by who? So in
that particular case, which
agency was that?
that was expending resources on
federal policies.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Valley, I
do not know.
I, I make this point because I
represent the Borderlands
Hidalgo County, Luna County, and
Tooniana County and Sierra
County, and I will tell you, I
know of no local agency.
That is enforcing federal
immigration policies. In fact,
I, I'm going to defend those,
those municipalities and
counties by saying they're
actually
Spending a lot of their own
resources for humanitarian
efforts that are not being
reimbursed by the state.
tent camps at churches and
volunteers are helping with the
migrant population that gets
caught there, and so to say the
state's not going to have a role
at all, actually concerns me.
For the, the health and wellness
of the migrant communities that
I can assure you that Luna and
Hidalgo County specifically have
borne the burden of
trying to help because the state
refuses.
To employ resources down there.
And I think that something like
this could actually exacerbate
and have the opposite intent of
who you're actually trying to
help. And I mean this sincerely
because it's the counties who
are coming in and helping
people. And I don't know of any
case down there in which our
local law enforcement has been
enforcing any of the federal
immigration policies. And so I
think this is a dangerous move,
and I say this because, because
while
While the federal government
cannot force the state to take
action, I would argue the state
hasn't taken any action and
isn't doing anything today.
What, what I'm concerned about
is by forcing and passing a
policy like this is that we know
as legislators, we just had an
update recently from the
governor with the fear of the
federal cuts.
And so
Can Mr. Chairman Senator, can
the federal government withhold
Federal funding to states for
refusing.
To adhere to federal policies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Braley. This isn't about
adhering to federal policies.
This is about assisting in a
federal program. The answer is
no.
The courts have up because we've
been through this before through
from 2000.
have uh 2017 to 2020 when the
government had a similar
program.
Uh, the courts upheld across
jurisdictions that no, the
federal government cannot
withhold funding, uh, if the
state chooses not to participate
in a federal program.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I would
say that declaring ourselves a
sanctuary state puts us in a
very dangerous situation with
federal funding that impacts our
schools and our seniors and our
healthcare, especially when
we're not solving a problem is
my argument, because as you
stated when we began this is you
can't, you can't really
Even provide a single.
Agency or state agency or local
municipality.
It is a problem and so this is
really proposing a solution. I
would call this certainly a
messaging bill that could do a
lot more damage than benefit,
and not only for, not only for
the, from the funding source,
but I would, I would encourage
you guys to take very close
attention to who is actually
helping the population that you
are trying to
To support and it is, it is your
local cities and it is your
counties down there who have
been completely ignored by the
state when it comes to um to, to
providing humanitarian issues,
uh, concerns down there. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Anyone else?
understood it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I, I, I see this as a bill
that we need because we have
people at risk.
We've already heard some
examples. I heard numerous
examples this morning. At risk
of being law-abiding citizens
with jobs and families just
being picked up.
On their way to work at their
house.
And then,
And it disappearing.
A young, a young man with a baby
on the way, the job in the oil
patch, it's gone.
You know, they often don't even
know where.
So, uh, this to me is not an
overreach, it has nothing to do
with crime.
And the cartels.
Now, we want all of our law
enforcement on that all the
time, everywhere. Uh, this is
just to try to protect people
that should not be picked up and
then disappeared for doing
absolutely nothing except being
in this state, this country for
years establishing a family,
marrying into local citizens,
and then having jobs and
producing uh taxes and funding
for the.
economy.
That's what this immigrant
family does everywhere, all the
time, all of them.
There's always a few bad people
everywhere.
Uh, that's what we want law
enforcement to go after. So I
think this is well crafted. It's
very narrow. Uh, they've taken
out things that uh probably
shouldn't have been in there to
begin with. Uh, so I, I, I think
it's incumbent upon us to try to
help protect people in our
community that are doing nothing
wrong other than we're brought
into this country at an early
age or married into and have
jobs that they're doing nothing
else.
That's what I see this bill
doing, and I think we need to
pass it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I think it's a good opportunity
to
put the burden back where it
belongs, which is the federal
government to solve our
immigration problem, um, with
some amusement a couple of years
ago, a gentleman by the name of
Steve Bannon, you all probably
know who he is and others
organize a fundraising drive to
build the wall. Remember,
originally the wall was going to
be paid for by Mexico and then
and that uh crapped out. They,
uh, they began doing fundraising
to build a wall, and
interestingly, the wall that was
proposed to be built was in my
district, some Park, uh, in El
Paso, you can see part of the
wall.
that was built there, they
raised some money. They got a
private landowner and let him
build part of the wall. It was a
scam, uh, I think, um, I think
there's been a prosecution of
that and some, some consequences
to do that because the, the walk
was only run on the private
property part of the land and
then ended at um Cristo Rey, the
mountain there, which is owned
by the Catholic Church, Catholic
Church was not about to let them
build a wall on the Catholic
Church part of the property. So
the wall only runs a few, uh,
You know, a, a, a short distance
and if you, if we're trying to
avoid the wall, you just walk
around the wall, um, and you
would walk around the wall in
Summer Park in my district.
Um, we ran into all kinds of
issues because the people
building the wall didn't get
building permits, didn't get,
didn't do all the things you
would normally have to do. It's
just an illustration of the
absurdity of our immigration
system, and I was uh
was appreciative of people on
both sides of the aisle,
Democrats and Republicans who a
year or two ago came together
and adopted some legislation at
the federal level, um, it seemed
like it had a lot of work.
People like us, legislators
working on it, bipartisan
support and um and I understand
that that the then candidate
Trump uh was very aggressively
to make sure that didn't get
heard, but uh uh uh the election
having taken place as Senator
Thornton pointed out, I really
do hope that the president and
the new administration will
Maybe now that they've got the
votes in the bag, go back and
look at that effort and really
try and address the immigration
problem at a federal level, but,
but putting that on us at a
state level is an abdication of
federal responsibility and we
should, we should embrace that.
Uh, the one thing that I'll,
I'll note is the bill does not
have a consequence, uh, in it,
and, and I'm reading through it.
So
Let's not get too, um, worked up
about the implications of this,
uh, if law enforcement breaches
this law, there's no consequence
in here in doing so, so, um, I
appreciate the fact that, that
we may need to have the law, we
may need to be able to go to
court and have a judge take uh
injunctive relief or something
else against a law enforcement
agency that's doing this and
violating this law, but there's
there's not a direct consequence
to the bill, so I, I don't think
that, that we're gonna see.
Terrible consequences as a
result of enacting this, so, um,
again, I, I hope all of this
will, that we should be able to
come together as a state and
across party lines to say
Congress needs to fix this, the
executive branch needs to fix
this. We have, um, yeah, we have
a lot of good people in
Washington DC who made the
effort, I think, and, and want
to step up to it, but I also
realized that there's some
political advantage to making
sure the problem continues to
exist, and uh
On my
Favorite quotes.
And a lot of go north and a lot
of great time
almost send a lot to go to
almost got in there,
yeah,
my consumere, um, long ago
taught me a lesson that I hold
with me all the time, the
lobbyist credo, which is if you
can't be part of the solution to
the problem. There's a lot of
good money to be made by
continuing the problem, um, and,
uh, he probably just want me
quoting him on that, but, but
he's been around here a long
time. Let's be honest, there,
there are a lot of people that
are capitalizing on the problem,
right? Uh, their financially.
capitalizing on it, uh, Steve
Bannon and others made a lot of
money on it. Uh, people have
enjoying political success from
it, and so, um, there, there are
some people that want the
problem to continue and it
sometimes seems that they're the
ones who protest the loudest to
people that want to have some
solutions, so I'll, I'll support
your bill for those reasons,
Senator.
Yeah.
Yes, you can, I bet.
Mr.
Chairman members, um, just thank
you for uh for the discussion. I
just want to make a few points.
This is not a sanctuary though.
In any way, shape or form, this
is a public safety bill.
We have a public safety issue,
we have a public safety problem
in our state. We need to recruit
and retain more, uh, more police
officers and many of us are
working on that. We do not need
them sidetracked working on
immigration. Immigration
pertains to the federal
government, and that's what
we're trying to ensure that we
do here. And that is what we
want to ensure that we are
communicating and um.
And just clarifying on the bill.
Anyone else? Sir Stewart.
Are you ready for a motion.
I move do not pass the Senate
Bill 250 and a Duke house on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 250.
Motions in order will take a
roll call vote on a do pass
motion.
Senator Senator, yes.
Pa
better story.
Senator Thornton.
No.
Better work. Yes.
Yes.
Yes, you have a do pass. Thank
you all for being here. Um, and
I know there are a number of you
people that are in the room that
were here on that last bill if
you all could exit quickly so we
can move on to our next
business, please. Senator Hall,
I'm gonna hear you next.
251. Yes, sir.
Senator Cravens, how nice to see
you.
Good to have you back.
a lot more.
I'm having more fun than I used
to. Oh,
may, may not agree with that.
What was the last year you were
here?
Was it 12.
Representative Hall.
Remind me, this is a first for
you?
Mr. Terry, it is my first in
Senate Judiciary. Yes, sir. All
right, well, it's good to have
you. I trust, um, but I'll just
confirm for you that we've got
some kind of unique rules for
the committee that, uh, we've
adopted a couple of years ago.
Now they're kind of becoming a
little more commonplace in the
Senate, but you may or may not
be familiar with them. So just
so you know, let me first of all
see, do we have any opposition
on your bill? We have no
opposition on your bill at all,
and um what I do is I just turn
the time over to you, you'll
have 10 minutes to advocate for
the bill.
You can use any part of that you
want, you can recognize anybody
you want during that time, all
right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee,
uh, this is House Bill 251. 1st,
I want to introduce my expert
witness from ERB David
Archuleta.
Briefly with this bill relates,
it provides additional options
to change the beneficiary for
retired members.
Who have the designated spouse
as a beneficiary in ERB and I'm
gonna turn it over to my expert
witness so he can just explain
uh why we, why this bill
Why I did this bill, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is David
Archuleta. I'm the executive
director of the Educational
Retirement Board and very
simply, this bill just brings
the educational retirement Board
to parity with public employees
Retirement Association by
allowing a retiree who's
receiving a pension to make a
one-time um non-changeable
designation of their
beneficiary, uh, after
retirement, has no fiscal impact
to the organization, and that
basically sums up the bill.
Thank you. There's no one else,
as I said, supporting or signed
up to support the bill, so we'll
go next to committee members for
questions. Anyone at all?
Senator
Mr. Chair, this seems like a
simple bill then if if I'm
hearing you correctly, all, all
this is doing is allowing to
change the beneficiary name of
the person who was receiving the
pension, they can change it. So
what's the rule right now? It's
just something that, that it's
not allowed.
Currently, it's not allowed, so
if you retire and you select
your, let's say as option B
where you are getting your
spouse will eventually get that
same benefit. And let's say they
pass away, then you would bump
up to option A, you'd get a
higher benefit at that point in
time. At this point in time, it
would allow you to make a
different beneficiary
designation, and then the
pension benefit would adjust to
account for that.
That's clear. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair.
Uh, so I support this. I don't
quite understand. We need 2 full
pages in the statute to do this.
It just seems crazy.
Center.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I, I
agree. I'll just a real brief
background on this. I got a call
from a retired.
Teacher this fall, and they were
trying to do this and I said,
well, let me look into it and
I began talking with ERB and
That's how we, we came up with
this as far as to the length of
it, I, I don't have much, didn't
have much to say on that,
Senator. Well, Mr. Chairman.
What you said was simple. That's
not what's in the film. I mean,
it's got a $100 payment to
defray the cost to changing the
name, you have to have a
notarized written statement. I
mean, this just makes me crazy
to think that we have to do all
of this to make a change for
retirement benefits that are the
retirees at the state, I mean,
would just seem crazy to go on
and on and on. No.
after
you do it.
Why aren't we make things so
complicated. I know I'm asking
questions you can't answer, but
if you've got any answer.
And, and Mr. Chair, Senator
Stewart, I mean, it's simply
making it consistent with the
rest of the language under the,
under this section as far as
retirement benefit options are
concerned, so just making sure
that it's consistent across the
board. We work with legislative
council service in order to
draft the language that they
thought would be appropriate.
The $100 fee applies to other
changes that may occur. Uh, it's
not necessarily critical to the
organization. It's a huge fiscal
impact, um, but ultimately if
this, if they have to pay this
fee in this situation, then.
be sort of unfair for those that
have to pay fees in different
situations. And so Mr. Chairman,
what happens if you're new uh uh
beneficiary dies. You don't have
an option.
you can only do it one time.
Senator Stewart, that is
correct. At that point in time,
you would, you would jump up to
option A if you went to
the show. All right, thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Others, questions?
I'm good, maybe a little follow
up to Senator Stewart's
question, I guess just really
one of these. I, I understand,
uh, represented the language
that would say
Um, there has to be
recalculation and computation of
the annuity benefits based on
the, the successive beneficiary,
but the
Um, so page 5, subsection C on
line 18 says the retired
member's spouse provides a
statement expressing the consent
to relinquish the designation.
Uh, do we do that elsewhere? No,
when I've got a, if I've
designated my spouse as my
beneficiary, and I want to
designate somebody else and
replace, replace her. Do I have
to get her consent?
Mr. Mr. uh Mr. Chairman, that is
correct. You would need to, uh,
if you're designated someone
other than your spouse as the
beneficiary of the benefit, you
need to get that, uh, basically
approval.
So they won't be having more
consent to that.
I'm not sure why or how or how
is that legal? If I'm retired
and I'm getting benefits and my
beneficiaries, my wife and I
decide that I want to change the
beneficiary, and you're saying
you want to make this
opportunity for me to do so. Why
do I have to have her consent?
Mr. Chair,
house. In other words, let's,
let's say my beneficiary is my
child, and I wanna change.
Um
The beneficiary. I'm just trying
to see whether this language
only applies to when a spouse is
the beneficiary because, because
right now it says
Up on line 9.
says that I can designate
another beneficiary provided
that, and then it says the
retired member's spouse provides
notarized uh statement
expressing the spouse consent to
relinquish the designation as a
beneficiary. It kind of implies
a circumstance where my spouse,
my wife would be the
beneficiary, but I'm just, I'm,
the way it's worded almost
sounds like if my beneficiary
was my daughter, and I wanted to
change it to my new son-in-law,
I'd have to get my wife's uh
approval for doing that.
Mr. Chair, I believe that it's
in a situation where your your
spouse has been designated the
beneficiary, you'd have to get
them to sign off on that.
Yeah, I think that that would
need to be more clear from the
bill we should probably say in a
circumstance where the spouse is
the designated beneficiary, but
right now, it doesn't really say
that, it just says, it reads the
retired spouse shall provide
expressing consent to know it
says to relinquish the
designation, I guess that
implies that that applies to
what it's a spouse is the
beneficiary, but I'm still left
with the same question.
What, what is the authority,
what is the requirement? Is this
consistent with where you do
this throughout, uh, uh,
retirement benefits, uh, again,
if I'm
My my spouse is my beneficiary,
and I've got to get her
permission to change the
beneficiary here, doesn't that
fly in the face of what you're
trying to do with this whole
build, which is to, and I, I, I
guess.
I'm reading back up at
subparagraph at the top, so I
guess all of this is really
designed to deal with the
situation when it's a spouse,
right?
Um, it says a member who's been
paid an annuity.
With the member's spouse is the
designated beneficiary may elect
to deselect the beneficiary. So
it looks like all of this is
really intended to apply with
spousal, uh, benefits, Mr.
Chair, that is correct, and we
did borrow the language from uh
what's contained in the public
education retirement Act.
So, so then I, I guess I'm, I'm
more clear with that answer.
All the, all of this looks like
all of that subparagraph.
is intended to deal with
espousal beneficiary.
Although I'm still
I'm still puzzled by the
Um, with the obligation that I
would have to get a spousal
approval. The good example is
this. Let's see, I'm looking,
I'm trying to read on to the
language on page 6, where
there's a divorce, that's kind
of the example I guess we've
probably run into, but, but if
you're not on the way to
divorce, what if you're
separated and you want to change
the uh designated beneficiary,
let's, let's say I'm permanently
separated and I want to change
the designated battery from my
separated spouse to somebody
else, you're saying I get, get
her approval. What happens if
she didn't give it?
Mr. Chair, I think that that's
fairly common, uh, in, in
certain situations where the,
the spouse, especially if
they're simply separated, does
not provide that approval, if
there's a permanent separation,
unfortunately I don't have a
better answer for you, and I'm
sorry I didn't bring our general
counsel to the table here. I'm
not sure how frequently this
occurs. I do know that it does
occur, um, but I'm sure I don't
have a better answer for you.
Yeah, I, I could see that
situation happening quite
frequently, to be honest with
you, is is there's a
Any number of reasons why
somebody who's receiving
benefits, again, you're, it
seems like the whole purpose of
this bill is to allow a spouse
to designate a different
beneficiary than their spouse.
And uh to say that you've got to
get their approval. I can see a
lot of circumstances they're
gonna say nope.
Uh, no, no diets. I, I wanna
remain the beneficiary, so, um,
I, I, I have some real questions
about how we reconcile that, so
there were so much better just
thinking maybe, I mean it's
community property benefit.
So the spouse has an interest in
that.
Retirements.
Just thinking through, that's
probably why.
If, if otherwise, you could have
a situation where
You are in a separation
situation, and
The person with the pension.
just decides to leave it to a
third party.
Which creates a huge problem, I
would think, from a community
property.
standpoint. So we do have some,
there's some interesting
gambling debts are another one
where there's some interesting
statutory law on that to prevent
one spouse from
In effect, putting the other one
on the hook and just different
scenarios like that. So I mean I
was just thinking that that
might be explained part of it.
Yeah, I just, I, I, this almost
looks to me like it's gonna lead
to a standoff in many
circumstances, right, where
you're gonna say, hey, you can
designate someone else, but
You gotta get my spouse's
approval and she doesn't give
it, so then what? What happens
then?
go to the courts in that
situation.
Yeah
Yeah.
Anyone else?
They do.
So Mr. Chairent it also says
it's a one-time irrevocable.
Option. So,
If
But if you get married multiple
times, um, you can only, only
change it to, to number 2, but
not 3 and 4.
Mr. Trans do, that is correct.
So it's, it's a one time okable
option in the situation where if
it doesn't work out with number
2,
And you can't designate a
beneficiary then if it's
something happened there, let's
say the spells passed away, then
it would bump up to option A, if
you've taken option B or C.
Oh, before I get back to, uh,
Senator Dewey, did you, did you,
did you have all this much fun
in the House Judiciary
Committee.
Mr. Chair, um,
I didn't deal with House
Judiciary, I went to education.
And another one, but they tore
me up on the floor pretty good.
And my own party, sir.
Mr. Chair, yeah, but I've been
shown the vote was 62-0 in the
house, right? So, I mean, I'm
making sure that your first
experience here in Senate
Judiciary is memorable,
um, I, I, I have a feeling that
it is, but Senator Doo, you had
the floor, 62 0 on the floor, is
that the right of the house?
Yes, Mr. Chair. OK.
Uh, Senator Dewe, welcome to the
Senate.
Well Mr. Chair, I'm just, I'm
looking at those options, A and
B. So if you wanted it to keep
on being paid.
During the person's life.
And you'd already used this
once. What, what's the
difference between
Option B and C.
Mr. Chair, Senator, so if, if
you're picking option A, you're
getting a larger benefit if you
pick option B, you get a lesser
benefit and then your spouse
continues with that same level
of benefit, uh, if you pass
away, and if you choose option
C, it's a lesser benefit.
They're gonna get a smaller
percentage and you're getting a
slightly higher percentage. So
if you selected in this
situation, uh, a design me and
that person passes away, as an
example, uh, right now, what
would happen if you designated
them as a beneficiary, you can
choose another beneficiary. You
couldn't move to.
your daughter or your son or
designate someone else, you just
be automatically popped up Tom
Shana. In this situation would
be allowed to move that designee
designated beneficiary benefit,
um, to, to another person one
time.
But Mr. Chair, with the, so I
don't, is there an exception in
here that says if the spouse has
passed away, you don't have to
get their written consent
because I, I don't.
I'm not seeing that, so it would
be, you'd have to get the
written consent from the dead
spouse.
Am I listening to that Mr. Chan
to do I I know it's not really
into the language here. I don't
know, um,
What would apply in that
situation. I'm sorry, off the
top of my head. I know that we
probably dealt with the
situation in the past. I don't
know specifically how we deal
with that situation now.
Well, Mr. Chair, I think the
concern is
This would go to court and then
the judge would look at this.
This is what the judge would
look at to make these
determinations.
So
Just make sure, just one more
question. What is the logic for
this just being a one-time
irrevocable option. Why
shouldn't she be able to do it
more than once.
Mr. Chair and uh Senator Wirth,
you know, basically there's an
actuarial calculation that goes
into paying the benefit based
off of the beneficiaries' age
and so forth. So rather than
monkey with.
Future obligations right now,
they don't have an option to
select more than one or a
beneficiary more than one time.
This provides us with a one-time
option and basically this is
Um, you know, that I, I suspect
to contain our overall long term
liabilities instead of being
able to just move along with
beneficiaries.
Uh, that's, that's the purpose
behind that and just make sure
and it's PERA is a one time as
well. Mr. Chair, Senator, that
is correct. OK, so to the extent
that it factors into the
bond and the impact on the fund.
I get that, I guess, uh, to the
extent it's because it's an
admit I'm sure it's a huge
administrative burden to try and
recalculate and move folks
around.
But I do think there's
hypotheticals that are
problematic.
With it being a one-time option.
And let me just say, I, I
support this. I've had
constituents come to me with it
just like you, Representative
Hall, with exactly this problem,
and they're like, wait a minute,
why can I do this? Why can PRA
do this and I can't do it under
this ERB. So I think it makes
total sense. I just think it
does raise.
A variety of different legal
questions.
And different hypotheticals,
especially if you have
spouse death.
Multiple spouses.
I just think there's some, there
could be some real unintended
consequences.
And not being able to switch.
A beneficiary, but right now you
can't switch at all, correct?
That is correct. So if you, if
your spouse passed away right
now, if you selected option B,
you would move to option A. So
you're gonna get a larger
benefit after the spouse passes.
Now, instead of automatically
move option A, you could select
another beneficiary, and they
would be allowed to continue
with the benefit upon the
retiree passing.
Got it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll
move to tables.
by Roaldo.
And I do hear you. Yes.
So.
Stewart.
I thought
No.
No.
No.
No.
Yes, all right, that motion
fails, other motions. Sara,
Mr. Chairman.
You know, this judiciary
committee needs to rewrite this
whole statute, but because we
don't have time, I'll move too
fast.
That's a very interesting
strategy. We don't have time to
fix the laws, so we'll pass it.
All right, uh, well, it's a
proper motion, so.
Well
We'll take that on a roll call
vote as well.
So, yes.
Senator you hate that.
They.
Yes, correcting my vote.
Senator Stewart.
Yes
Ben Thornton.
Yes.
Senator, yes.
Yes.
No,
they would do.
Um
I'm not sure what we've done,
but some, somebody will figure
it out. Thank you.
To rent.
We had you scheduled last time
or you're back up?
Thank Mr.
Chairman.
On the Senate Bill 359, um, and
I want to thank your staff for
their work on this bill.
Senate Bill 359 establishes a
former formal procedure whereby
a homeowner or an authorized
agent may submit a verified
complaint to a sheriff to effect
the immediate removal of
unlawful occupant.
From a residential property on
receipt of such a complaint, the
sheriff was required to serve a
notice to vacate on the unlawful
occupant and his further
authorized to remain on the
premises to ensure that both the
individual and any of that
individual's property are
removed. Additionally, the
statute confers a private right
of action, thereby permitting
any person so removed to
initiate a civil suit for the
recovery of possession of the
property.
This is the squatting bill.
We did the swatting bill, now
we've got the squatting.
This has become more and more of
a problem, uh, as, uh, I'm
hoping that that none of you
when you go home, find someone
living in your home.
Um, but in areas of our state as
well as other states that
there's a lot of um
Vacation homes, a lot of times
they will come back to that
vacation home and someone was
living in their home
watching on their property. This
sets out a framework for them to
be able to be removed in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Senator, we had uh
Our colleague Senator Cravens
signed up to speak on the bill,
is that right?
We do have a committee sums.
Yeah, that's right, Senator
Stewart.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I move it do
not pass on Senate Bill 359 and
for purposes of discussion do
pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee's substitute for 359.
All right, thank you.
Um, Sunday we have uh
supporting.
Mature
and Mr. Craigin's, where are
you?
Oh, there you go. I cra you
recognized for a couple of
minutes.
Mr. chair members committee, uh,
thank you and, uh, uh, Senator
Brant, thank you for bringing
this forward. Um, I'm a
registered lobbyist for uh New
Mexico Realtors Association.
Um, and, um,
It's particularly concerning for
realtors, uh, from a safety
perspective that vacant homes
are truly vacant when they're
supposed to be, and uh for that
reason, we're in strong support
of Senator Branch bill. So thank
you for bringing this forward.
We took all that stuff.
up.
Uh, registered in opposition by
the following individuals. If
you're here, would you just
raise your hand so I know you're
Diane McCash here. No, Mone
Silva?
No, Denali Wilson.
No.
Danica Terronis on Zoom.
on it
get to know.
No. No, I, and any of the other
individuals name I mentioned?
No?
Um, and Mark Allen. So Mark,
there you are, Mark, uh, Mexican
Association account, so you can
come up Mr. Allen, and you're
the only person who's gonna
speak in opposition. I'll
recognize you for up to 3
minutes.
New Mexico counties opposes this
bill. Mexico County is really
concerned about the liability
this creates our sheriffs are
also concerned about evicting uh
individuals without any due
process, and this bill basically
replaces the, the judge with the
sheriff, and it charges the
sheriff to make the
determination whether or not the
occupant, whether or not the
person filing the complaint is
the true owner.
And that they're entitled to the
relief and, and we're just
concerned that our sheriffs just
don't want to go out and vict
somebody without the protection
of a court order. Judges have
judicial immunity, Sheriffs
don't have such protection, and
the concern is that there are
lots of there's lots of
opportunities for this to be
misused. You could have a, a, a
land contract. Well now you got
the occupant who's an equitable
owner.
And uh but the land contract was
never filed, and the, the
seller.
Decis it doesn't want to go
through the process of uh filing
a breach of contract claim and
simply falsifies.
this complaint.
And, and the sheriff shows up to
evict.
And uh and that's going to be a
difficult situation because the
bill doesn't provide any answer.
What happens when the occupant
comes forward and says, here's
my land contract.
And then they, you know, you
know what's a sharp. There's
just so many, you know, if
there's one thing that people
will fight about is water and
land. And uh with, with someone
who believes that they have a
right for ownership, and without
any due process, having the
sheriff make that determination.
And if the sheriff gets it
wrong, the sheriff gets sued.
There's protection in this bill
for the, for the property owner,
uh, but there's no protection
for the sheriff.
if they make the wrong call.
And, and we think that 111 idea
that was suggested, which we
think is a great idea. We
understand the issue. The
sheriffs are very sympathetic to
the to this problem. But, but
one suggestion that was made is
that this be an amendment to the
uniform resident Relations Act
as an expedited process and
expedited process where the
complaint that you're having
them file with the sheriffs, is
filed with the court, and you
have a process that's very
quick.
The judge hears it,
Makes a determination, grants
the order, and then our sheriffs
are more than willing to carry
out that order.
To, uh, to remove, remove the
squatters, but that's our
concerns is there's just so many
ways for this to go sideways and
our sheriffs will be on the
hook, and they would, they, they
want to have a court order when
they're removing someone from
property that they believe that
they have a right to be there.
So we request that this uh not
be passed. Thank you, Mr. Allen.
All right, that's everyone we've
got registered and support our
opposition beforehand, so we'll
go to committee Senator Dewey,
your first.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Senator.
See, I think
I mean, I think this stuff is
better without those penalties.
Um,
But I think it still has a lot
of problematic things in it
like, like we just heard, um,
I mean, there's, there's no,
there's no due process.
In, in this, this procedure.
As the bill is before us. Um,
I don't know how the
Yeah, there's comedy that this
is making the sheriff, the
judge, and it is. Um, this is
immunizing the property owner.
For, uh, on page 6, lines 19 to
22.
For, for damage they do.
To, uh, to the other party's
property.
Uh
It's saying that only the, the,
the property owner and only the
property owner.
against the cost.
Uh, uh, and damages incurred in
statutory damages, um,
It is a one-sided provision, uh,
The thing about the courtchi
advance the cause on the
calendar.
I, I don't know what that means
and
I also don't know if the
separation of powers, it's
appropriate for for us to have
language like that in here. Um,
But I, understanding that the
squatting is an issue and, and I
admire your
Your desire to to address that.
But
I think creating a process that
essentially does it an end run
around the due process that
someone would otherwise be
entitled to through our court
system. It, it's highly pro.
So.
I, I can't support the spell.
Others.
Anyone else? Yeah, so Thornton
and centermeister's.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just one
question, how long is the
squatter allowed to stay on the
property before they can be
evicted, if you will. I mean,
what's, what's the law right
now?
Mr. Chairman, I don't believe
our law addresses.
Um, someone that takes over your
home.
Uh
You know, trespasses onto your
property and then
Just decides they're gonna live
there.
Um, there's, there's not a
process now to have them
removed, which is why we're
doing. We need to put this into
law.
There needs to be a process. If
it's someone that has rented the
home and that, that's very clear
in this bill. If it's someone
that had rented the home and
they haven't been paying,
there's a process under law to
remove that person. There's not
a process to remove someone
that's trespassed onto your
property.
Um, and is, is squatting on your
property.
Thank you, thank you. So, Mr.
Chair, so if I, if I leave for
vacation for a week and I come
back and someone is
decided they wanted to partake
and live in my home while I was
gone for that week.
Um, right now you're saying I
could call the sheriff.
And
And I understand what's Senator
Doig said with regards to no due
process, but this person's in my
home.
And uh
Yeah, I'd like to have them
removed immediately. And so the
question I guess I'm asking is,
What legal right do I have to
get them out of there?
As it stands right now.
Uh, this chairman ideal to any
of the attorneys up there like
to answer that, but I believe
right now you're gonna have to
go to court and go through that
process, which could take months
to have that person removed that
moved into your home while you
were on vacation.
Mm
OK.
Um,
I know how I remove them.
Oh, not here.
Can't keep track of him. He and
gone right
he was the next one up, uh,
anyone else before I go?
I'm gonna echo center the
concerns that Senator Dewey
expressed, but I'm gonna add a
few as well, um, and, and
really, Mr. Allen for the
counties, I can understand where
the counties would not want this
as sheriffs would not want this
kind of surprised that we don't
have sheriffs here say they
don't want to do this, um, and
it's not a matter of not wanting
to do this, but I just don't
think they're equipped to do so.
This is not their area, and we
do have courts and the the this
I think should be in a in an
area where there's some process.
Uh, so, for example, in the bill
right now, a, a large part of
the bill is
They form that's proposed to be
adopted the statute, almost all
the page 3, 4.5 of 5 or a
proposed form, we generally
don't do that in statutes, um,
and enact that as part of
legislation. I'm not gonna say
we never do that. We do that
sometimes, but it's pretty
infrequent, and the reason for
that is, as you well know, it's
hard to change a statute. It
takes some doing and the timing
is, let's say it's, we're not
doing this in a 60 day session,
but you may have to wait 2 years
to get back to a 60 day session
to change.
and a form and statute. So we
generally don't enact forms on
statute, we leave it up to
others and um and the courts
sometimes do this.
The the very first page of your
building the first section says
is used in this section unlawful
occupying and you're defining
what that means on lines 23 and
25 through 25 on the first page,
but you're saying unlawful
occupying means a crime,
constituting trespass, so
you're, you're mixing here, I
think what is a civil procedure,
it sounds like to me, but, but
you're involving the sheriff and
you're involving some criminal,
uh, conclusion you're saying
this would, this would be a
crime, we're talking about here,
by occupying.
This and that, I think does
require some some due process.
Um, there's a number of things
that are qualifications for the
sheriff to do this, which is
that they have to, somebody has
to make a determination whether
the occupants or immediate
family members are not. Somebody
has to make a determination,
there's no pending litigation.
There's a number of things that
you've got in your, and you're,
you're putting all that on the
sheriff, and I can understand
the sheriff doesn't want to know
whether the occupants or
immediate family members are not
and have to make that
determination. A sheriff's
really usually not in a position
to know whether there's pending
litigation between the occupants
or not.
So these are things that I think
um sheriffs are generally
poorly equipped to do.
Uh, likewise, the requirement
that the that the requester has
to come from a property owner or
authorized agent.
Um, and provisions of notice and
so forth. So I, I really do
believe most of the things
belong in a, in a, a magistrate
court typically a small court.
I, I agree with your point. I
understand why in part there
might be some pressure to bring
this because the court process
can be very slow when I'm I'm a
landlord. I know what that is
getting a tenant out sometimes
takes quite a bit of time and,
and, and some tenants, tenants
my experience, a lot of tenants
are pretty sophisticated.
They've learned how to get the
notice and then get a
continuance and get a hearing
and get a judge, give them some
more time and so forth.
And so the process can be pretty
frustrating when you're the
property owner.
But if you, if you look at page
5 of your bill, the sheriff has
to verify that the person
submitting the form is the
record owner. I was sure of
verify somebody's a record owner
means they've got to do
essentially a title search
really and make an essentially
have an opinion from a legal
opinion about whether the person
is really the record owner, and
then, and then it says the
sheriff also has to determine
whether the person appears
otherwise entitled to relief.
Now that's making a sheriff
essentially a judge in my
opinion.
Uh, the, um, paragraph 6 gets
pretty, pretty far out there. It
says the uh the person
submitting the form as the get
actual possession that says on
line 3 it says if appropriate,
the sheriff may then arrest any
person found on the real
property for trespass or for
outstanding orders or for any
other legal cause uh when
warranted. That's, that's pretty
broad authority to say the
sheriff's going to go there,
take you out and may arrest you
for anything else, any other
legal cause, um.
I'm also troubled by the
language on page 6 that says
that when the sheriff does this,
as would be contemplated, the
sheriffs to stand by peaceably
while the owner locks locks the
doors, changes the locks and
removes the personal property,
and it says, uh, you can you
move this, uh, you move the
property of the occupant, uh,
from the premises to or near the
property line. So, I mean that,
that sounds to me like the
sheriff's gonna go in there and
watch the owner go ahead and
take everything stuff out of the
house or everything they've got
there, put it on the street,
right? Um.
And that may not be really ideal
for a lot of reasons, uh, may
not be ideal for the neighbors
and the properties in the
neighborhood to have somebody's
all, all their belongings put
out on the street and then the
bill goes on to say the owner is
not liable.
Uh, for any loss, destruction or
damage to that personal
property, again unless the
removal was wrongful, there's
gonna have to be determination
whether it's wrongful or not,
and by then the TV and
everything's gone, um, so I
just, I see a number of concerns
that preclude me from being able
to support your bill, Senator. I
wanted to give you my reasons in
doing so.
Anyone else? Sarah Stewart.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I, I, I have friends
that this happened to. It's just
such an outrageous thing. It's
just so emotionally outrageous
to come back to your house and
there's somebody living in it.
So I want us to do something
about this.
Surely there is some way that we
can make this prime or do
something with it. I understand
the due process and what you're
saying about the judges, and
I've followed all the issues, so
yeah, the bill is flawed, but
shouldn't we be trying to do
something about this and making
it a crime and dealing with this
issue.
Looking at me.
There ought to be a law. Well,
there is a law. There's a
forcible detainer action and
there's a 3-day notice, and
there's the judge is supposed to
hear it within a week. The civil
remedy, and it doesn't mean that
it can't take some time, but
I've had to do it on behalf of
primary landlords, not, not the
situation where someone shows up
and you come home from vacation
and someone's in there, that's a
little bit interesting. That's
the main issue and senator is
that yeah, as a landlord, you
said you have
tenants, I've had tenants
before, I'm not currently a
landlord, but those tenants have
rights.
Doesn't the homeowner have
rights when someone decides to
come and take over their home,
just because, you know, I went
on a 10 week RV trip.
Couple of years ago, right after
the 30 day session, loaded up in
my RV and we drove all the way
down to Florida and came back.
What if someone was living in my
home when I came back.
Now I'm probably gonna be more
like ant and take care of it
myself.
But we're trying to do a legal
way without someone getting shot
to have that person removed from
the home. Um,
we are having this problem in
more of the like the Taos and
the angel fire areas they're
having some of these problems.
They come back up to their
vacation home and, and it's
gone, but it could easily happen
to someone that's up here.
And, you know, their their home
in Roswell sitting empty or
wherever. We're up here for 60
days.
What happens if they go home and
someone's living in their home.
Right now, the law doesn't give
them a process.
To remove that person without it
taking time.
That person's trespassing onto
their property.
That person probably has broken
into their property, broken a
door, broken a window lock or
something, and under our current
law, we can't get them removed.
The squatter, the person that
trespasses on your property has
more rights than you do.
That needs to be solved.
So I think, Mister Chair, that
you could go in and get a TRO,
but there is a court process
that you can go on an expedited
basis.
And get a court order that
I think you could convince a
judge, get the sheriff.
drive straight over, get that
person out, but it does mean
you've proactively
Got to take the action, unlike
what you're trying to do is have
the sheriff step in and or try
to do is avoid someone getting
shot unnecessarily.
Yeah.
Mr. Chairman Senator Brown,
thank you. Apologies had to run
and present a bill, but it, it
actually shocks me that um that
the crime of trespassing is not
enforced.
Uh, from time to time, and I
know it puts the officers in a
tough predicament from from time
to time, but sometimes it
doesn't.
If you own a house, if you own
an apartment, if someone's name
is not on the lease.
Um
And you don't want them there
anymore. That, that's the, the
crime of trespassing has
triggered the second they
refused to leave.
Now, as it relates to a retail
store or an abandoned warehouse
or something like that.
Um, that makes it 10 times
easier. Um,
But when an officer says like,
oh, that's a civil matter.
Uh, you know, go hire a lawyer
or whatnot. It's like, well, no,
trespassing is a criminal matter
and it's an arrestable offense,
which means leave now or
Or I will arrest you.
Um, it's a big problem. I think,
uh, I think this, I appreciate
you trying to solve this
problem, um.
The um
The, the no liability.
It's, uh, is
This is, you know, makes the
bill less than perfect, but I
just wanted to make the point
that um
And I appreciate you working on
this issue and I'm, I
guess I'm questioning the no
liability because this clearly
has a process for a person who's
who maybe they were your tenant.
You've tried to get rid of them,
they didn't leave, and then you
try to use this, there is a
liability there. They, they also
have a court remedy, just like,
you know.
You're claiming the property
owner who's someone has taken
over their property unlawfully.
Um
has to go through a court
process. Why doesn't?
The
The tenant, the person who's
trespassed up to do the same
thing. So there is a liability,
they can go through that process
and they can and they can be
made whole through a civil
court.
I.
Well, I know the motion I'd
normally make, but I didn't have
any luck the last time around,
so
it's I'll make it for you, Mr.
Carroll move this table.
I think you and I were both
alone on the last ones that are
doing it, so you and I may not
have the right mojo going but uh
we're on a tabling motion,
Emily, please do the roll.
No.
He, yes.
No.
Ben Stewart.
And
No the table.
Uh yes.
And my
Uh, yes, move to explain.
Yes, the bill is tabled, I would
like to explore. Mr. Chairman
Senator.
of the, the sheriff's, um, the
counties are opposed to this,
there's liability on the
sheriffs, which makes it even
more trickier, but I think
there's a path.
To ensuring that this takes
place and
Just uh
Appreciate your work.
You figure it out.
Plenty of times.
Uh, center Gallego's House Bill
10.
Representatives, yeah, I know,
I, I realized that I had to
catch myself.
Oh, you wish.
And she's my, she's my
representative, so it's like,
don't get too pushy.
Although now I can change my,
maybe my beneficiary, you know,
maybe I get Jennifer's
permission.
That's fine.
for me.
done.
Rips guy goes, I trust you're
familiar, but we have uh rules
over here for this committee
where we recognize an advocate
for a block of time, and I leave
it entirely up to you to, uh,
control the nature of the
presentation, so you recognize
who you want during that period
of time, you let them speak as
long as you want, if you think
they're going too long, I'm
counting on you to cut him off,
OK? Um, otherwise, what ends up
happening is we may have one
person speaking the whole time
and you had others that you
planned to have speak and you've
run out of time, so I'm leaving
it entirely up to you.
And we'll recognize you for let
me just see what we have. We
have opponents. Do we have any
opponents?
So we have what looks like maybe
about 10 people who've
registered in support or are
these people part of your
presentation that you know, let
me, I'll just go through the
names so you can just nod your
head if, if they are part of
your presentation time. um, Ben
Leeinger, Jesse Hunt, Amy May,
are these people part of your
presentation or just give me a
yes or no. Yes, sir. All of
these people are part of your
presentation. I believe that
there. OK, yeah, and I, and I,
and they're shown as part of the
organized presentation, so Dan
Pa, Ben Baker.
and uh Chief Weasler.
Um, we also have, uh, Captain
Kevin Burns, Benjamin Baker,
Sheriff, uh, Shane Ferrari by
Zoom Matt Kennicott by Zoom and
Riki Tero uh for the DA's. Oh,
the DA's are here.
Terrific. Um.
And so, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
recognize your organized
presentation for um this
representative to 10 we'll do,
you'll have, you have 150
minutes, but you probably want
to leave a little bit of
rebuttal, so we'll, I see your,
your co-sponsor who's now used
to the way things are working
over here, so we'll, we'll leave
you, um, but there's really not
any opposition, so I don't know
you really need to reserve any
time for a rebuttal. So I'll
recognize you for all the 15
minutes and I'll let you control
every one of those uh
individuals who want to
recognize during that time, and
you have the full 15 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, Mr.
Chairman and, uh, members of the
committee, I'm bringing to the
Senate Judiciary Committee
today, House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for HB 10 RLD
cannabis enforcement. I'm joined
by my Senate co-sponsor, Senator
Trujillo, other co-sponsors are
Speaker Martinez, Leader
Armstrong, and 7 other House
colleagues.
It is an agency bill by the New
Mexico Regulation and Licensing
department, let me take a few
minutes to discuss why this bill
is important.
I have in my district probably
the largest indoor cannabis
growing operation in New Mexico.
Uh, in the community of Bedino,
just barely out of your
district, Mr. Chairman. The
owner has invested over $10
million to ensure his operation
is state of the art. He is
employing local residents and he
is following the rules. I've had
many conversations with him and
have heard his frustration of
product being brought into the
state illegally.
Illegal grows and disregard of
the law by some of the industry,
as he tells me, it is hard
recouping your investment when
you're competing with cheaters.
Under our current law, the
cannabis division of RLD has no
authority to enforce the
criminal laws of our state, HB
10 addresses the problem head
on.
This bill isn't just about
revoking licenses. It's about
the ability to embargo seize,
recall cannabis products that
are illegal, tainted, or
misbranded.
This bill aims to strengthen the
enforcement of cannabis
regulations, ensuring public
The hundreds of New Mexicans who
have invested their life savings
in this business and ensures
everyone is playing by the same
fair level playing field. This
bill has been endorsed by the
New Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, law enforcement
agencies, district attorneys,
and many small, medium, and
large canvas license holders
throughout the state. I yield to
Senator Trujil for some opening
comments at this time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative for
letting me be a part of this.
Um, members of the committee,
this, this is really overdue,
and it's time for the department
to have the authority that they
need to really do the
enforcement. When we talk about
the illicit market, we're not
just talking about those who
don't get licensed. We're
talking about those who get
licensed and go outside the
bounds of what their license
allows. This is really about
public safety. The purpose of
Of establishing the cannabis
regulatory Act in the first
place was primarily to ensure
public safety, to try to ensure
that the public knew when they
went and bought a cannabis
product that it was a safe
product that the state knew what
was in the product that they
knew where the cannabis had been
grown, that they knew how it had
been manufactured and that they
knew that it was being tracked
through the whole process. That
is not possible without some
sort of.
Enforcement regulatory um
enforcement. So I appreciate
that you're giving us the
opportunity to present this
today.
And Mr. Chairman, we have 2
witnesses with us, Clay Bailey,
Superintendent of RLD and Todd
Stevens, director of CCD. And
with that we stand for
questions. Um, I know that there
are people wanting to speak and
if you would give him one
minute, um, I think that's
plenty of time, Mr. Chairman.
If you could do so, that, that's
fine with me.
Jessie Hunt, you all made loose
line up.
Amy Mae and Pavlon, Ben Baker.
Troy Wheasler.
In that order.
Everybody will be recognized for
a minute.
Chairman Cervantes committee
members, I'm Ben Lowinger with
the Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce. I first want to
acknowledge the historical
tenuous tenuousness that exists
between the cannabis industry
and law enforcement.
This bill, HB 10 is not about
creating a new law enforcement
division that's going to be
kicking down doors or busting
heads. It's about equipping our
cannabis regulators with
resources and specific
abilities, namely the ability to
seize season in place, and
embargo questionable cannabis
products. Uh in the last almost
3 years, there have been several
examples where these uh
abilities would have greatly
helped the industry and would
have protected consumers.
Uh, instances where gray market
and Elisa market cannabis would
not have made its way to the
shelf or out into the
unregulated market.
The regulation and licensing
department has several divisions
that have similar law
enforcement bureaus, so this is
nothing new and this is nothing
specific to cannabis. Um,
Again, recognizing the
historical trauma, this is what
the industry needs. The only way
that this industry thrives is if
we do so in the light, and we do
so in a way that roots out bad
operators, and that helps to
curb the illicit market, which
has only thrived since we've
legalized cannabis. Thank you.
Mr. Hunt.
For one minute.
Hi, I'm, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, I'm
Jessie Hunt and I'm here on
behalf of Critical Solutions,
which is a manufacturing company
and Field of Dreams, which is
one of the largest um operators
in Sunland Park actually in your
district, Mr. Chair. And I just
wanna say um thank you to
everyone who's worked on this
bill so much. We've actually
been working on this for a few
years, knowing that in order for
the good operators like my
clients and the others
represented here.
To succeed that they need this
level playing field and they
need to really be able to, um,
uh, have the bad actors rooted
out of the industry, and the
only way that we can do that is
by having an agency that's able
to take those actions. So thank
you for your time. Thank you for
being succinct to Amy May.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
my name is Amy May and I am the
owner and operator of Mayflower,
a legally licensed microbusiness
located in the heart of Torrance
County, right on Main Street in
Estancia.
I also sit on the board of
trustees for the town of
Estancia.
As an elected official, I have
spoken to and shared the
frustrations of other lawmakers
and leaders in our community
regarding the inability for the
industry to regulate itself and
where they go when they have
issues. I've been running my
small shop for 3 years now and
my business, my children, and
myself have been harassed,
threatened, and intimidated by
various illegal operations like
the Benali Grow over this time.
I refused to back down and give
up on my dream of
making my community a better
place for future generations. I
continue to stand with local
community leaders and local
elected officials in support of
House Bill 10 to ensure the
continued success of this
budding industry.
Thank you. OK.
Dan Palo.
Oh you, Miss Baker, I guess
you're next up. I don't have
Pablo was next on my list. I
don't see him here. Anybody? No?
OK, Mr. Baker, very good. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the esteemed Senate Judiciary
Committee. My name is Benjamin
Baker and I have the privilege
of working for our governor
advising her on matters public
safety, and I'm proud this
evening to rise in support of
House Bill 10. I'd like to thank
the sponsors for undertaking
this important topic, and I'd
like to thank the committee for
its deliberate work in making
sure that the
veracity of the laws passed out
of here make for good
application in our, in our
state. The additions
contemplated within this
legislation are precisely to
designed to address the things
that the state has learned since
the time that we passed the
cannabis regulation Act. The
critical addiction of New Mexico
peace officers to the act, who
are specifically trained and
authorized to investigate and
enforce administrative rules and
criminal laws within the
specialized environment will add
instant public safety value to
the citizens of our state is
value
drive not only from the the
things that have been mentioned
earlier about the illicit and
illicit marketplace and bad
actors, but additionally, I'd
like to speak about the freeing
up of resources, particularly in
our rural jurisdictions where
that work right now is being
left to the local jurisdictional
law enforcement agencies spread
off awfully thin. Um, it's my
belief that House Bill 10 will
appropriately equip the cannabis
control division with the
authority to carry out all the
duties necessary to regulate and
investigate within and adjacent
to this industry in New Mexico.
For those reasons, I urge this
committee's consideration of
this bill. Thank you for you,
Chief Weasley.
Evening, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Troy Weler,
chief, uh, Mexico State police,
state police sports House Bill
10 and it's establishment and
enforcement bureau in RLD to
oversee the cannabis industry.
Uh, as you've heard currently
enforcement is scattered among
law enforcement agencies with a
myriad of other
responsibilities, which makes it
difficult to combat the illegal,
illegal cannabis operations. HB
10 will create a dedicated
enforcement unit to monitor,
investigate, and take action
against illicit market activity.
This bill also removes legal
ambiguities that have
plagued past enforcement
attempts, uh, such as an example
of one that state police
conducted in San Juan County
last year, where we were sued
for seizing massive amounts of
obviously illegal cannabis that
we had a court order to seize,
yet it did not prevent a large
lawsuit. This bill allows
authorities to swiftly seize and
embargo illegal cannabis without
lengthy legal battles. It also
shifts enforcement costs to the
violators, ensuring taxpayers
are paying for dis dismantling
illegal.
operations.
By integrating enforcement with
regulatory oversight, HB 10
ensures stronger coordination,
faster investigations, and more
effective compliance efforts.
It also allows other law
enforcement agencies to focus on
broader public safety concerns
while still ensuring the
cannabis industry receives the
enforcement level it needs. HB
10 is a common sense measure to
protect New Mexico's legal
cannabis industry, prevent
illicit activity and enhance law
enforcement capabilities. I
appreciate RLD and the sponsors
taking state police's input
throughout the process of
creating this bill, and I urge
your full support.
Thank you. Thank you, Chi.
Uh, we also had requested to
To speak in support Captain
Kevin Burns.
Here? No, been, uh, Ben Baker,
we already heard, Sheriff Shane
Ferrari here.
Um, by Zoom is share Ferrari by
Zoom.
Shane Ferrari.
Matt
About Matt Kennicott by Zoom?
No.
And is it uh
And Rick Tidro, you hear
there. Yep, come on up.
a couple of minutes, please.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Rick
Tedro on behalf of the New
Mexico District Attorneys
Association, uh, the president
of the association sends his
apologies for not being here.
He's currently attending a
family funeral, and um
We would like to thank the
sponsors for, first of all,
reaching out and involving the
district attorneys in reviewing
and looking at this bill and
asking us to present or to come
over and support, so on that,
the New Mexico District
attorneys Association supports
this bill. Thank you.
All right, that concludes those
who uh sign up and support.
We'll go now to members of the
committee.
questions.
Comments, Senator Doohe.
Thank you, Mr. Claire. Thank
you, Senator and Representative
for bringing this, um.
This is
This is well overdue, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, I've heard you.
say multiple times.
You know why
Why aren't we doing more
enforcement, uh, I could, I
could go get an injunction
tomorrow if, if, if I needed to.
Um, and, and the reason we're
not doing more and better
enforcement is because we don't
have this, yeah.
Um
What happened, what my
understanding of what happens
now is uh
Uh, CCD goes and inspects, uh,
uh, a licensee who is maybe
approved for
200 plants, and they find 2000
there.
Uh, then they go and try to get
an injunction and, and maybe if
they're lucky, they'll get it,
get it as quickly as you do in,
in your home districts, but I
don't, I don't think our other
judicial districts are, are
quite as fast as that. Uh, but
by the time they get back,
With their, their warrant, uh,
or with the injunction, it's
gone. Everything is gone.
Everything is already on the
black market. So without having
the ability to, to put a hold on
things and the police powers to
put a hold on things when they
see them. Uh, it's impossible to
have effective
Um
effective enforcement, and as we
heard from from law enforcement
here today, law enforcement has
a lot of other things that they
are focusing on.
Um.
They, that this is, this isn't
what we want them spending their
time doing. This is what the,
the regulatory agency in this
area should be doing. I, I was
surprised to find out that I
So there's a bunch of, of
divisions within RLD that
already have police powers that
the financial institutions
division as police powers. If
they have police powers. I think
it sure makes sense that, that
the, the cannabis uh control the
vision.
That as well. So I am, I'm very
much in support of this bill.
Thank you
members your comments,
questions?
Um
trying to figure out who you
guys look like. All right,
Senator Thornton, Senator, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Thank you, Representative
Senator, for bringing this
forward. I really appreciate uh.
This, this coming forward. I
know for a fact that we had a
big bust in Torrance County,
which is one of my counties, uh,
back in January, I believe. I
actually spoke to the FBI folks
to sort of get an understanding
of what was happening there.
But they were basically growing
4 times the, the number of
plants they were allowed to,
supposed to be growing.
And uh I, I understand they
issue fines of a million
dollars, but this, this has been
going on for well over a year or
two in, in the Torrance County,
and it took forever to
finally get action on this, and
so I, I would support this 100%
to to give this responsibility
to RLD, uh, so that they can
take control so I really
appreciate you bringing this
forward and I look forward to do
pass on this hopefully. You know
how hard it is to get things
through the judiciary.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Senator Truha
the um.
I'm just kind of going through
it.
The uh
You know, creating a new police
agency is a big deal, so thank
you for taking this on. Um,
Why uh
Why doesn't it just say
I'll get to that in a sec. I'll
just go on page 2, Mr. Chairman,
well there are so these folks
are called enforcement agents,
um, and it says I'm, I'm looking
at paragraphs B and C on the top
of page too. So the department
shall employ employee
enforcement agents.
And the enforcement agents uh
shall be under a bureau chief.
Like.
And the enforcement agents shall
be peace officers. The um
The, um, so.
There is, there is the word
peace officers in state statute,
Mr. Chairman, it's, it's rarely
used.
It's either mostly police
officers or law enforcement
officers, which is kind of
interchangeable, but did you
choose peace officers.
Mr. Chairman, um, Senator, so I
just want to point out that um
it says and she'll have the
powers and duties afforded peace
officers and so we wanted them
to be specifically for
enforcement and nothing else,
um, but they are afforded the
duties and the, the way that the
peace officers came about is
really a drafters's suggestion.
I mean, we looked at the
language that we have, and I'll
just um make uh I, I, I
appreciate Senator Duigg saying
that we have other, it's the
Securities division that has law
enforcement and then also the
pharmacy and that language is
similar to the language that's
used for those, and that's how
that happened.
I'm sure Senator Trujillo or Mr.
Chairman, the um,
Does the, uh, does the division,
does the um
Cannabis controlled.
Uh, because of the cannabis act,
uh, the cannabis regulation Act
is it allow for unannounced
inspections.
Oh cannabis products, growers
and retailers. I'm looking at
the top of page 3 line 3.
Mr. Chairman and Senator on the
committee, that's not an
uncommon thing, even on the
construction industry side,
they're unannounced, generally
speaking, and especially on the
cannabis side, if you're gonna
go in, you're having some issues
and you're having problems on
the criminal side of it. Sure
enough, I'm not gonna call and
tell him you're coming, but it's
not uncommon for the cannabis
CID or any of the others to show
up with a permit and do the
inspections or do whatever's
taken.
So even now when the inspectors
go out, we go there, you know,
regular hours.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Superintendent Bay, so that I
think that answers my question.
So that's legally allowed.
For the division to do
unannounced inspections
under the current law
current law, the department has
the ability to do inspection and
as um the superintendent said,
um, it's not uncommon. In fact,
that's the order of business,
um, when you go and you do an
inspection for a hair salon. You
don't make an appointment and
then come in and do the
inspection.
You go and you do the inspection
during normal business hours,
um, and, and that's just the
normal course of business.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Truhill cause it, um
Cause this is like the, the crux
of the bill, the division, and
the enforcement bureau shall
enforce the provisions of the
cannabis Regulation Act and may
carry out announced and
unannounced inspections,
unannounced inspections by the
government are.
Requires search warrants, uh, by
a court. And so we're saying
that because it's in the normal
course of business.
Or like giving him like a
blanket search search warrant or
they already have a blanket
search warrant.
Um, Mr. Chairman, the inspection
is not necessarily a search
warrant where they just can go
and search things, inspection,
the inspectors and all of the um
CCD director talk about it. For
example, when you go to a hair
salon, you've got a checklist,
right, of the things that you're
looking for. They're a licensee,
um, they don't have that kind of
right to a privacy. They're a
public business, they're open
for business, their licensed
under the
state and one of their
responsibilities is, in fact, to
let the department do those
inspections. Now, the reason
that we want that language
specifically in there, um, is
that this is an industry,
unfortunately, that is prone to
suing the department.
And or threatening to sue the
department that we don't have
powers. And so for this
particular instance where it's
not necessary for us to do that
for
Funeral homes. It's not
necessary for us to do that for
a barber's shop or a salon
because they just expect with
licensing that that's what's
gonna happen. This industry is a
little bit different.
Mr. Chairman through for that
explanation that just keep in
mind that I don't know if this
bill would create uh a 24 hour
ability to do unannounced
inspections.
The, um
And then it gives you the um.
And so, so we dropped down on
line 11, Mr. Chairman, page 3,
subparagraph 2. So it says in
the course of these inspections,
Uh
Conducted pursuant to this, to
this bill for the purpose of
laboratory testing collect and
take custody of samples. So in
other words, that happens today,
right? Or
Or, or, or what they need a
warrant to take those samples.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, I'm
gonna let the division director
respond to that.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, we could currently do
that today if we suspected that
they were uh adulterated
currently for a licensed
premise. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Director.
So that kind of begs the
question.
The cannabis regulation Act is
the law.
We're creating this police
agency specifically to enforce
the law. Are we?
What aspects of the Cannabis
Regulation Act are we changing?
What, what, what laws are we
creating with the creation of
this police force, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator, that's a
really good question. So we're
not changing anything in regards
to the cannabis Act itself, and
there's parts in the Cannabis
Act that direct the department,
the division to do inspections
and to test samples. And so
that's all written into rules
how those testing samples will
go. So we're not changing
anything.
We're adding a new function that
will be housed under the
superintendent to have a little
bit of distance, but we'll work
in cooperation with the division
director, and I do want to point
out that the current law, um,
right now, um, requires the
division shell.
Request the Department of Public
Safety.
Safety to enforce the provisions
of a cannabis regulation Act as
deemed necessary. We're not
taking that out.
And so the department will still
have the opportunity to work
hand in hand with the Department
of Public Safety.
Thank you Mr. Chairman Senator
Truhill then that, that kind of
begs the question if we're not
changing any laws, why doesn't
it just be a one-page bill that
says,
Uh
The division shall have uh
Uh, an enforcement bureau
attached or whatever.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. So part of the
development of this, cause this
has been in process for a number
of years and I, and I just want
to share that that incident that
happened in Estanzia was
happening a year before I
retired, and I retired in
November of 2023. So it was a
long drawn out process, but a
lot of this language came from
knowledge that we gained from
Colorado. And so the department,
even back when I was there, we
met with Colorado.
In fact, uh, Senator Cervantes
was up in Colorado, and we were
on Zoom listening to the
presentation, and they gave us
kind of a lowdown or rundown of
what are the things that you
need to make sure that you do.
You need to be able to embargo.
You also need to be able to
destroy, but you also need to
not have responsibility to take
it into your custody because of
course we don't want to take
Tons of marijuana cannabis into
state control, where would we
put it? What would we do with
it? So all of these things, all
of these, you know, steps that
we're taking were from the
knowledge that we gleaned from
Colorado's experiences.
There are about 1015 years ahead
of us.
Thank you for that. Anyway, I
was just, it's more than a
curiosity, but I'm just, what is
the war and we're just creating
a police force.
Uh, and if so, amending the, the
cannabis regulation Act. What
we're doing is we're amending
the RLD Department Act.
Uh
And if for a many the RLD
apartment Aquin't we just
creating a police force and then
we want the police force to have
kind of new powers or or put
rule into law, it just seems
like we should be.
Changing the act, not
Not in the police powers
portion. But anyway, the, um,
and lastly, Mr. Chairman, on top
of page 4, you got um
God.
That
You know, the enforcement bureau
may take control pursuant to a
warrant.
Uh
And then it says uh on line 4,
the enforcement bureau made
petition the district court for
injunctive and other equitable
relief. So that's kind of neat
and, and I'm not criticizing the
policies.
But
the department and the, and the,
and the counsel for the
department, uh in a lawyer
petition in the district court
or, or do you just want police
like filing petitions in
district court. Mr. Chairman
Senator, that's a good question.
I'm not really sure how, why
that's set up the way it is, but
I will tell you that the
securities division, as well as
the pharmacy board when they get
um, you know, petition. It's
actually the law enforcement
that are doing that.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Senator and Representative
Pagos, the, um, and then it on
page 6 it says the division
shall give sufficient notice.
Uh, is that
Currently in rural or what's the
standard course of business with
regards to that.
When you issue an order of
restricting the movement.
Of a product.
Oh and I guess that's not really
a timeline, that's just kind of,
or what is that? Is that a
timeline or is that just written
notice there on, on the scene,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, what the,
what I'm hearing from the
division director is that that
they would use rules to
determine what is sufficient
notice and what that would look
like.
And then Mr. Chairman uh
representative Senator Truos,
the word embargoed.
In the act
To finding the
Oh, and this bill, it's fine,
thank you, it's defined in this
very bill on page 7. OK, got
you. Thank you.
And then if uh
If the division has to destroy
cannabis products, which is no
easy task.
Um
is the licensee pay that expense
now.
uh on the bottom of page 5, we
want the licensee to pay the
cost, I guess, of the.
Of the controlled burnout where
you destroy the product.
Senator, now the department
doesn't destroy it, right?
Unless we have, I, I, I, I mean,
I,
uh.
I think the division directors
should answer that. I'm not
aware that they've ever had the
ability to actually destroy it.
Correct? Yeah. In the past, when
it was under the Department of
Health, the um, the, the staff
would go in and they would just
pluck out plants and they would
destroy them. And when it came
to the regulation licensing
department, we questioned like,
where do we have the authority
to do that, so we stopped doing
that because we don't have
explicit authority to do it, and
so this would give them explicit
authority to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Trujil. Then
lastly, the um
So you say you, you, you embargo
some products, you realize, you
know,
Uh, you're gonna release the
products back to the, to the
person.
Uh
And then on the
subgraph age it says neither the
the division nor the enforcement
bureau shall be required to care
for the embargo seized cannabis
products.
Um
So I can understand the polish
with regards to that, but would
they still be liable?
Uh, under just general
Laws of the state of Mexico.
If, if they seized it.
They found out that that they
were wrong.
Uh, and then they, uh, and then
the product was harmed or
damaged or whatnot, they still
be liable or does this give them
immunity that that word required
to care, Mr. Chairman Senator,
I'm not sure that it gives them
immunity, but it gives them
cover, so long as they're doing
it in a in a in a
You know, responsible, um, not
neglectful manner, um, uh, this
tells the department that they
have the authority to do it.
They're gonna have to act within
reasonable bounds.
Thank you so much for senators
representative because it's,
it's key that
Um, I think there is
protections. You have the, in
other words, the bureau, the
bureau chief isn't hiring their
own cops.
Uh, you have the department.
Uh, kind of hiring the, the
agents, they work for the bureau
chief. I just always am
concerned with police agencies,
each agency.
Uh, over time has its own
culture.
Culture, right.
Sadly, my hometown police force
had a culture of uh excessive
force that had to be
Dealt with pursuant to a federal
court order, but um, but I would
just ask the, the leadership at
RLD and and the division to just
keep an eye on that culture.
Uh, cause you're giving this
police force immense power.
They're going to probably have
immense.
Um, moral authority in their own
minds to do all this stuff and
we just kind of
Make sure that they're um
That it's done the way you guys
envision.
Thank you, Ms. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Uh, thank you, Representative
for being here and senator. I'm
always cautious to disagree with
the lawyers on this committee. I
will say this representative, to
say that that unannounced
inspections require search
warrants seems a little foreign
to me because we know that
daycares can be um inspected by
EC ECD at any time to count
blocks and bananas. We know that
uh dairy can be inspected at any
time by the Environment
department for water runoff. Um,
I can think of another lot of.
gen c ies We know that gas pumps
um can be inspected by New
Mexico Department of Act at any
time to make sure that weight
and measures are off and so I, I
would say that many state
agencies can make inspections
and do quite regularly and have
an enforcement and often
penalties, um, from, from their
forward. So if the legislator is
going to legalize marijuana. I
believe we have an obligation to
aggressively manage the illegal
black market.
Marijuana and absolutely when
this was legalized, we should
have had a very strong
enforcement and penalties branch
of doing this. And so I
wholeheartedly support this
effort. Um, I think it, it, it
surprises me to know that it
wasn't already done, but I
completely understand and if, I
mean, again, if we're gonna, if
we're gonna enforce uh many of
the things that we do that don't
have very, very, very meaningful
outcomes. This is one when it
comes to us to to manage that
illegal market of marijuana, so
I
have a yes vote on this, and I
thank you for bringing it
forward.
Um, I appreciate the chance to
follow you, Senator Brantley,
because among the things that
can be inspected are chili
processing plants, um, and we
get regularly inspected all the
time and they don't tell us
they're coming, uh, which is
probably a good thing and, and
we're comfortable with, with
that. So you're right. Um, I
probably been the harshest
critic of the enactment of
legalizing marijuana since we
did it for precisely the reasons
we're now finding out 4 years
later, right? is the original
law didn't have enforcement.
Mechanisms did not contemplate
these things and we should have,
and we had every reason to know
that we should have.
Um, and I, I think we have to
ask ourselves why it's taken us
4 years to get here. That's the,
that's the troubling thing for
me. I appreciate Mr. Bailey's
met with me, Mr. Stevens and I
were part, we went, went with
the Attorney general to Colorado
together to meet with the
Attorney General there. It's,
uh, Senator Hills talked about.
I, I, I really appreciate the
very last day that she was a
superintendent, uh, state
employee. She took time to come
all the way to I think we were
in Vegas, um, with the Stevens,
and we had a hearing.
Uh, for precisely these issues,
and that was a year and more ago
and before that we had a hearing
on the same issues in Las
Cruces, and we had the same
issues back then too. We're
we're moving way too slow on
this, and I, I have my theories
about why we move slow. I think
we purposefully move slow on
this because this is a problem
we created and we don't want to
accept responsibility or
accountability for creating it
or legalizing it for not having
enforcement and, and let's be
honest, we're still not gonna
be, this is still going to be
far too inadequate, right,
because what
The principal ways you're going
to enforce this is by uh
jeopardizing licenses. Well,
there's no jeopardy to a license
because licenses are, we can
hand them out like candy, right?
And anybody can have multiple
licenses and so we, we patterned
this after alcohol, but poorly.
Um, and many of you all have
heard me say this, we have 32
dispensaries in Sunland Park,
uh, the community that I
represent. there's one grocery
store, um, and, and that, that
does something to a community, I
gotta tell you. It does
something to the community
seeing cars lined up and 32
dispensaries in a community that
has that population in one
grocery store, maybe one liquor
store, um, and so,
I've been really um hard on RLD,
uh, Mr. Bailey's met with me
several times. Mr. Stevens met.
I've, I've been really pushing
them because I've really thought
they've always had this
authority. I still think they
do, um, I know you all have
tried to go to court, you've
tried to get injunctions. I
guess I really have a question
for you because when I, when I
met you before, I said, well, we
go to court and the judge won't
give us a hearing, right, that's
usually what I hear. The judge
won't give us a hearing anymore,
and I've got to tell you, I'm
smiling at those who practice
law, I said, Mr. White, I see
Mr. Lopez out in the audience.
You know, I can get an
injunction tomorrow.
Uh, if I have a good reason,
and, and our judges are there.
They're, they're there for a
reason. If you give a judge a
good reason that somebody's
breaking the law, they'll,
they'll come into work uh early
and they'll leave late, and
they'll read the motions and
they'll, they'll do the job and
I, I just really don't think
we've tried very hard. Um, I see
my friends in the state police
here, and every time I've asked,
how can we have these illegal
operations, somebody referred to
the Ben Aliro operation out
there for years, right? Years.
We're reading about it in the
newspaper, we're reaching.
Searchlight running stories
about it, thousands and
thousands of plants out there,
human trafficking, Chinese
immigrants, firearms, cash, and
we read about it in the papers
and nothing happens and I
Uh, now Senator Trujillo and I
call these gentlemen, I meet
with him and says, why is nobody
doing anything about it, man,
it's always this, right? It's
always that. State police says
it's not our job, it's the local
state police.
I guess my time's up.
But that's what I've been here
for 4 years, right? If the
agency says, well, we can't do
anything about it. I said, well,
why? And they said, because we
don't have express legislation
saying we have authority to do
anything about it, and I'm, I'm
still at the school of thought,
even at my advanced age that,
you know, you don't ask for
permission, you ask for
forgiveness, right? I mean, you
go in and enforce it and then
have somebody tell you, you
couldn't have done that or you
shouldn't have done that, but,
but the agency says, well, we
can't enforce it because we
don't have the authority and
then they, uh, the agency says
we
You can't go to get an
injunction to the judges won't
listen to us or we can't, uh, it
like it's candidly for everyone
here it sounds like a lot of
excuses, right? Um, and the
feds, when we talk about the
feds, the feds say not, not our
problem because you guys created
the problem, right? That's the
Fed's attitude is you guys made
the mess and so we're not gonna
clean it up.
And um again, I, I'd love to
hear more from the people who
really, in fairness should be
heard, but when I asked this,
how come the state police aren't
enforcing the law. Uh, well,
that's not their authority,
evidently. It's not the state
police job to enforce the laws
of the state. I don't get that,
but, OK. Uh, why aren't the
sheriffs enforcing it? Well,
because we think that's for RLD
to enforce or for the or for the
state police to enforce, that's
why the sheriffs say that. Why I
appreciate um Mr. Tedro being
here for the district attorneys.
Thank you.
for being here cause I've been
hard on the district attorneys
for not being here on a lot of
things that we need your help
and advice for, but how come the
district attorneys don't uh
bring criminal charges, that's
what they do, right? Um, they
bring criminal complaints and
prosecute people and why aren't
the district attorneys in
Valencia or Estancia, uh, doing
this kind of stuff, beats the
hell out of me. Um, and so,
It's just, I'm incredulous that,
that we have to be here, but of
course, I'm going to support
this, uh, but we shouldn't
operate government that way. I
think it should take us 4 years
to enforce our laws. It
shouldn't be a matter of
everybody trying to avoid
accountability, everybody avoid
responsibility, avoid everybody
saying we, we don't want to do
this and, and again, I'm gonna
come back to where I started. I
think some of that is our fault
as elected officials, because we
created this situation and I
think a lot of folks are saying,
look, you guys made the mess.
Uh, now don't, don't, don't be
dumping it on us, but, but
represents is right, we have
very, uh, reputable business
people who invested a lot of
money who want to do this right.
They're trying to do it right
and when we passed this law, we
said we're going to do this to
get rid of the black market,
right? We're gonna do this to
get rid of illegal, uh, grow,
and let's be honest, had the
exact opposite, right? We have
more black market, New Mexico's
kind of the gateway for
marijuana in the country, I
think now, maybe with the
exception of maybe Oklahoma, we
hear a lot of, a lot of products
being coming out of a moving
through Oklahoma, but we're the,
we're the place to come if you
want to operate illegally in the
marijuana industry and I think
we've created that situation and
we haven't wanted to acknowledge
it and we haven't want to accept
accountability for it and let's
be even more blunt. Some of this
is political.
Um, and I'll just call it what
it is. Um, it was my party and,
and a lot of people in, in our,
our way of thinking that that we
should legalize this and, um,
and so since we were the leaders
in legalizing it, now we don't
want to say, well, maybe we
didn't get it quite right. Um,
and, and that's unfortunate, but
I, I think that's kind of where
we're at today. Uh, the one
thing that I did here with Mr.
Stevens when we were in Colorado
that I have questions for you,
Senator and Representative our
resources. When we're in
Colorado, the big issue was, um,
You're hearing today, we don't
want to seize the product and
store it. Well, we have to. I
mean, if you're gonna prosecute
somebody for a crime, be like
somebody making a drug bust and
saying we found a bunch of
cocaine, but we don't, we don't
have a place to store it. We
don't want to keep it, so we
won't prosecute, right? We,
we're gonna have to find a place
to store it. We're gonna have to
find a place to bulldoze that
we're gonna have to get, we
heard all this in Colorado,
where they've got bulldozers and
they've got, you know, all kinds
of apparatus to go in there and
when we've got these big
operations, that's what it's
gonna take. And I
I'm curious, is there any money
here for uh Mr. Bailey or Mr.
Stevens to do any of this? Mr.
Chairman, thank you. Um, that is
a really good question, and I
will just say on speaker.
Um, in this committee, you were
right.
And we should have done this
when we passed the law, and I
don't think we, none of us, I
didn't understand the cannabis
industry, and I don't think any
of us that we're trying to
implement it understood the
cannabis industry. Um, but, but
I appreciate that we're here and
that we're moving forward on it.
There is money in House Bill 2
already, and I believe it's $1.5
million to get started, and
that's just to get started.
They're gonna have to come back
for more money next year, um,
the initial process is for cars.
for um hiring um personnel, and
then, you know, after they get
through that, then we are going
to have to figure out how do we,
how do we seize it? How do we
destroy it, um, as you said, up
in Colorado, they used um they
used things like the National
Guard, right? They, they used a
Department of Transportation.
That's the only agency that
would have equipment that's
quite big enough to plow, um,
A field and to gather in in what
we learned is that not only do
you have to like dig it up, you
can't just leave it there to dry
because, and that's what you do
with cannabis is you leave it to
dry so that you can use it. You
have to actually grind it up and
then you have to bury it in the
ground, you know, deep so that
it, it um ferments or that it
spoils or whatever it does, it's
not usable anymore. And so this
is really just a first step.
And, and there's going to have
to be more investment by the
state, um, to move the
department forward as they learn
what kind of equipment and what
kind of resources are they gonna
need.
Well, and I appreciate that
seems like a drop in the bucket,
and I think you're probably
gonna nod your head and say
affirmatively that is a drop in
the bucket and and my concern
is, is I've been around
government a long time, seems
like a very, very long time. I,
I, I think I get it, which is uh
uh next year will be, well, why
didn't we enforce this more?
Well, because you didn't give us
the resources, right? So now
we're giving you the law and now
it'll be, well, we didn't, there
wasn't enough money in the
budget to go do the enforcement.
Um, there'll always be an
excuse, uh, uh, for things that
I, I'm
hoping that we're eliminating at
least one of them here today
too, you said the senator, when
we enacted this almost 4 years
ago, we didn't understand the
industry. We should have, uh,
there were plenty of states, as
you said, they were well ahead
of us.
Oh, we should have taken the
time to do this right back then.
And um I think we need to
revisit all of what we're doing,
uh, the notion that we're gonna
give away licenses to anybody
who wants one as much as they
want. We, it's an interesting
story in the review because we
did that to avoid creating the
problem we do with alcohol and
liquor licenses. We said, well,
these are worth 500 or $600,000
that are state licenses, they
shouldn't be worth that much
money because it's something we
do, but we made the scarcity
valuable, so we said, we'll do
the opposite, we'll just let
everybody have a license, as
many as you want.
Um, and now, unlike alcohol,
where they would regulate and
police themselves because they
didn't want to lose their
license. They didn't want to
lose a $5,006,000 assets, so
they made sure that their
servers were very well trained.
They made sure that people
checked uh licenses and verified
age. They did a lot of things to
protect that asset because it
had great value. Now, now
because we've given away
licenses like candy, you could
take away my license and I'll
use my license B or I'll use my
licensee and if you take away
all my licenses, I'll go get
another one, or I'll get one in
the name of my spouse or my
partner, or I'll create a new
LLC or a new company, I assume,
and they'll get a license. And
so we really have no enforcement
mechanism maybe other than this.
And I think we've got to go back
and look at the whole thing, uh,
and, and, and we're probably way
we do. It's, it's unfortunate
that, that we're, where we're
out without, without that
effort. So I, I applaud you
again. I want to thank you for,
for spending your very last day
as as superintendent with us to
come address exactly this issue
and you and you did so, uh,
with, with, like I said, when
somebody's on the last day of
work and they're way out the
door, they're very honest,
right? And I've learned to, to
regard you to be very honest
about the shortcomings of, of uh
Um, what we've done in this
industry, so I, I support this.
I hope that we'll, as a group,
start putting more money into
this where it needs to be
because I, again, I'm trying to
think of a million.5 dollars for
enforcement, and it's not what
we heard in Colorado. They,
they've invested a lot of money,
it takes a lot of money to
enforce this, and it should be
worth it. This is an industry
that I assume is worth many
millions of dollars.
Uh, in the illegal market, and
that's probably not the New
Mexico we want to have, I think.
Mr. Chairman, maybe that's a
bill that we can carry together
next year to limit licenses.
Yeah, um, let's, let's start
here and let's start the
discussion here today. I mean,
we, there's probably more, many
more things that need to be
cleaned up. I'm looking at
Senators. I know she's worked on
this before,
and did a big cleanup last year.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, we did, we
did, we did a lot of work that
needed to be done. We're still
giving away licenses, I assume
like candy, right? Anybody who
wants one can have one.
and so as long as we're doing
that, I don't know how you're
force it with, with licenses.
Anyway, Sara Stewart
pass on house commerce and
economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 10.
Other discussion, is there any
objection to the Du pass motion.
Myestus
post, all others in support. You
all have a do.
Nice to see you, Representative
Gallegos.
goes, how's home.
You've been home.
Can you pick up my mail?
Where she's a
We create the agenda and uh
generally put the bills in
numerical order. It's not the
necessary order we'll call bills
in and I do some of that to try
and expedite things where we
think we can to recognize you
all have other committees in, in
places to be, so I see um
represent Hera, I'm gonna do
represent Herndon first those
House Bill 66, I think that's
gonna be a pretty
straightforward uh issue. So
we'll hear next House Bill 66,
please.
And thank you, Representative
for your patience.
And just so you all know from
the house too, uh, I'm not one
of those who expects you to sit
in a chair and lose your place.
So if you need to be someplace
else, you want to be someplace
else, if you let us know where
you're at, we'll go find you. We
won't, you won't miss anything
by not waiting around on this.
Representative Herndon, um, I'm
looking to see, we have a couple
of people who registered in
advance and support.
Are they part of your
presentation? Uh, Bill Coney and
David Straczynsky.
Zelski, are they part of your
presentation? Uh, they will not
be with us. They'll just be
standing in support. OK, good,
and I'll recognize them but
briefly, um, and you have Mr.
White, and I don't have anyone
registered in opposition. So
they're being nobody registered
in the opposition. I'm gonna
recognize you for 10 minutes,
all right? And you use that time
how you want.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, and Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, we are
bringing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 66 before you as
legislation that represents a
compromise negotiated with
insurance companies, the
workers' compensation commission
and workers who have been
injured while at work.
And Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I'm proud to inform
you that much of what is
represented in the bill started
as a task force that met over a
year ago.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 66
accomplishes two things. First,
it increases the statutory fees
for attorneys that had not been
adjusted for over 13 years, and
second, it increases the
discovery fees that are, that
had not been um adjusted also
and this is to make sure that we
are adequately reimbursing the
professional expertise of
doctors who are providing their
uh
Expertise opinion uh as a part
of these, uh these cases and
just those two items, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee, I
have with me our expert, uh,
Peter White, who's a well-known
attorney in workers'
compensation, and he will make a
presentation to you, making sure
that people understand just what
workers' compensation attorneys
do and how this bill affects
that.
Uh
Term Cervantes, members of the
committee, I thank you for
letting me be here today. I've
been a, an attorney for 32 years
doing workers' compensation
work, when I started, uh, it was
just after they passed the
workers' compensation Act in
1990, which was a compromise
between employers, insurers,
and, and workers to provide fast
fare, and efficient, um,
resolution of workers' claims
who are who are injured on the
job, there have been uh
It, part of the act was that
there was a fee cap of 12,500.
That was increased in 2013 to um
22,500 and 13 years since, it
has not been increased. What's
happened since that time is that
there's been uh about a
departure of about half the
attorneys who represent workers
and, and we, you're aware.
Uh, Senator Cervantes, you were
at our, at the other meeting
that they are very few attorneys
in rural areas. Um, the
There was a motion in a bill in
2023 to raise the cap, and there
was a house memorial to provide
for the task force, task force
met over the course of a year,
came up with this proposal to
raise attorneys' fees to $30,000
then to tear it up 2 years and 2
years to 29,000 in 2029, there
was input from the um
From the director of the
workers' compensation
Administration who is here,
Heather Jordan and and Michael
Holt, general counsel for the
Workers' Compensation
Administration is also here.
They provided input and
suggestions, uh, that that
resulted in the substitute bill
that also provides that this fee
cap increase applies to the uh
occupational Disease Act.
There was a give and take by
both sides. There's also, uh,
uh, there's a crisis of, of
workers who can't find
attorneys, there's also a crisis
of access to medical care
because, uh, doctors are not
being paid sufficiently, so this
proposal provides a modest
increase in what you can pay a
doctor to testify regarding a
worker's injuries that goes up,
uh, to, uh, eventually to 4500,
it'll go up to 3500, uh, after.
If, if this bill is passed,
Um
The advisory council, also the
Workers' Compensation
Administration supports passage
of this bill, uh, there's a
provision that was added that
allows the workers' compensation
advisory Council to review this
in 2029 to see if there need to
be any adjustments to this bill.
Uh, I strongly support this
bill, and I encourage any
questions.
Katie, are you here?
Uh, David.
Trazowski, are you here? No,
either one of you? All right,
they were the only two.
For the two had registered to
speak and support, so we'll go
to members of the committee for
questions.
That's it.
Oh, I'm sorry, missed you, sir.
Yeah, miss, uh, well, I'm
getting your name wrong,
Strazowski, is that right? Yeah,
you, you're recognized so you
can, you, you can, yeah, you can
speak, you can speak for a
minute, sir.
Um, senator Cervantes, members
of the committee. My name's
David Stazewski. I, um,
was injured 19 years ago.
I was an inspector for the uh
state of New Mexico.
So I did work for LD RLD back
then. So I, I really
Support
Uh, house built in also, I mean,
everything they doing like
totally agree with, but, um, my
problem is is I'm the problem.
I'm the one that
I uh
An injury that's gonna last.
My lifetime. I, I broke my neck,
uh.
Yeah, 19 years ago in 2006.
I've had 2 surgeries.
I have spinal cord injury and
C4.
So I have many, many problems
that, uh,
It's gonna take a couple of uh
You know,
Lifetimes to, you know, Peter
White, I know he, he's my
attorney. I think he wants to
retire.
And I'm concerned about uh
You know, in the last 10 years,
I know he's
pretty much pro bono for me.
You know, so.
It's just this, uh, House Bill
66, but.
really help out.
And thank you. All right. We'll
go back then to members of the
committee.
Um
I tried to let other people go
first sometimes instead of doing
it, but you're looks like you're
the one on, so go ahead. I don't
mean to be ignoring you.
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative for, for bringing
this bill. Uh,
When I graduated from law
school.
I, I looked at.
What areas I wanted to go into
and almost instantly dismissed
doing workers' compensation,
cause I didn't know how I could
make a living doing so. I don't
know how Mr. White makes a
living doing so. I think he's
been representing this gentleman
for what, almost 20 years and
got paid 20.
$2500 despite.
Countless appeals, um, it is
just
It is not, it's the the point of
setting the system up was to, to
make sure that
There was a, a quick equitable
way to deal with these claims,
uh,
We have not
We have not achieved that
purpose if
If it is so hard to make a
living doing this, but
Folks can't get people to
represent, so thank you for
bringing this. I think this is
long overdue, uh, and looking
forward to seeing this go into
practice.
Sara Maley, glad to have you.
Thank you, glad you could join
us. Um, anyone else?
So, like Senator De, when I,
when I started practicing,
Early on, uh, with Moro
Sperling, I started out doing
workers' comp. and it's, it was
a great place to start out
because you get a chance to
depose doctors all day long,
right? And you get very good at
medical reviews, medical record
reviews, and working with
doctors. I've, I've got to tell
you, you're increasing the
discovery uh allowed in, in the
act of, I guess over a period of
time, up to $4500. I, I think
that that's still far too small,
but I recognize there's a
compromise on that issue as well
too, just so uh those who
are not lawyers are not doing
workers' comp here, that 4500
has to cover the cost of taking
depositions, which I got to tell
you, uh, there's almost
invariably a doctor representing
the employer in a litigated
case, right? And there's a
doctor representing the claimant
in a litigated case and just
taking two doctors' depositions
alone paying them their hourly
rate and getting a court report
is gonna exhaust that $4000 in
no time at all. I'll, I'll spend
that really with one deposition
in a day with
with a doctor, in fact, we've
got doctors, maybe not in
workers' comp, but we have
doctors who charge, uh, several
$1000 an hour to appear for a
deposition. So without, without
a greater budget there, you're
limited in your ability to get
that discovery and your doctor's
deposition's got to be 30
minutes or an hour where that is
really oftentimes uh fairly get
a, get a chance to explore the,
the nature of the injury, but
again, I, I accept that as a
compromise, and, and I'll also
note the importantly for Mr.
White.
graduate, what did you graduate
in 90?
Uh, Mr. Chairman graduated in
1992.
OK. Um, cause you said the
compact, the Compact was enacted
in 1990, is that right?
Mr. Chairman, that's correct.
All right. That was a pretty
ambitious effort, but it's done
some good things, but it's also
been lacking in some areas and
as you put up, Mr. White, uh,
when I started out, uh,
practicing in Albuquerque and
then moved to Las Cruces. There
were 2 or 3 attorneys doing
workers' compensation work in
Las Cruces. Right now, do you
know, I don't know if there's
anyone in Los doing workers'
compensation, is there, Mr.
Turner, I'm not aware of anybody
down there. Um, I don't think
so, and in Santa Fe, how many
people are doing with it's a
specialized.
Practice very highly
specialized, very complicated
area of the laws of how many,
how many practitioners are doing
workers' comp in Santa Fe.
There are two who are very busy,
and then there are several who
do a case here and there.
Yeah, and those who do a case
here and there are, are making a
terrible mistake. I mean,
workers' comp, I learned on it
is not something you dabble in,
um, and it's a, it's, it is very
Uh, formulaic and there's a lot
of definitions and terminology
and procedures and deadlines,
it's a, it's a complicated area
of law, very specialized, so,
um, I, I, I'm not gonna count
the dabblers, um, and then I
shouldn't probably, but that
means there's two lawyers in
Santa Fe, there's none in Las
Cruces. How, how many would you
say are specialized in in hold
themselves up especiallyists in
Albuquerque.
Uh, given those some research a
couple and in Farmington and
then there's about 33 overall,
so doing the math, it's in the
twenties.
In Albuquerque.
Yeah, so we, if this was, let's
be honest, this was part of the
goal of the enactment, right,
was to avoid litigation, uh, to
facilitate things, there weren't
lawsuits, and to try and have an
efficient system and it, it
might arguably be efficient,
but, but if we don't have
lawyers who are doing this kind
of work, we're gonna find
ourselves in a situation not too
far down the road. We're gonna
have to do something different.
And, and you're doing some of
that here by increasing the
fees, which is good. Again, I
appreciate there's a compromise
there too, but my guess is, Mr.
White, you tell me the
are not gonna bring out any more
practitioners would be my guess,
is that fair?
Mr. Chairman, the hope is that
it that it will, uh, we'll,
we'll have to see. I, I don't.
I don't really know what they,
as you said, there's a lot
involved in in learning this
practice. There's, there's a
whole lot.
Yeah, and if we don't have the
lawyers who are doing it for all
the good work that we have in
the workers' compensation Act if
nobody's gonna do it, uh, follow
the act we're gonna find
ourselves again with this
situation that we're gonna have
to.
get back and correct all over
again, so, uh, again, I support
the bill. I appreciate you
bringing up
together so there.
Mr. Chairman, I move the do pass
on House Judiciary Committee's
substitute for health 66.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
Um, uh, I know I've spoken
already, but I'll just note
that, I don't want this to go by
too quickly. The advisory
council, so I think it's
important for members in the
audience on the committee to
know that the workers' compact,
the way it was set up, is really
hard to change and, and the act
has inherent to it the creation
of advisory council that is
represented to both of employers
and employees and attorneys and,
and they meet and they advise us
on any changes and it's, it
usually takes an endorsement
from that group to get get work
back, uh, work on back James. So
I
appreciate their would you send
them our appreciation to to for
that, for that advice.
All right, we're on a do pass
motion. Is there any objection?
There's none
that, oh, I'm sorry, uh, Senator
Paul, Senator Thornton, went too
quick for you guys, Sir Bradley.
Uh, you have a due pass center.
Represented. Sorry, excuse me.
Uh, OK.
I'm gonna
Give me just a second. I, I'm
told that we're waiting on an
amendment for House Bill 5. I
know a number of you are here
for that.
We rolled over by Senate 318 at
our last meeting, so I, I may
get to that too, but Senator or
represent her you've been
waiting and I'm gonna
I'm gonna ask for your
indulgence just a bit more with
one more thing that I think will
be pretty quick and we can clear
this.
I believe quickly, but it'll
make for an interesting
discussion. So
Senator Maestas, would you take
the chair for a moment, please.
This is really rude. I'm gonna
do one of my own.
Alrighty one HJ 2
eliminate pocket veto.
So again, I appreciate the
consideration of Representative
Herrera, but I'm stepping over
her because we're hearing a
house bill that I'm putting on
for uh representative McQueen,
HER2, Mr. Chairman, members
Committee, I think the issue is
well known to all of us. This
would eliminate constitutionally
the opportunity for a governor
to pocket veto bills. This would
require that when a veto takes
place of a bill by governor,
there has to be an explanation
or reason given, if we're all
very familiar with the issue,
we've seen it. We've had some
frustration with it and when
you've had a bill veto.
You
probably feel the pain of not
knowing why or how to come back
in the following session to
maybe improve the, the bill or
do what it takes to, to have a
different result. So, uh, there
are some amendments that were
put on in the House Judiciary
Committee, I believe. Otherwise,
it's a relatively
straightforward and simple
issue, and I look forward to
your questions. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and, and
And it's in, uh, it's in under
House resolutions in my
notebook, um, even though it's a
house joint resolution, but is
there anyone in the audience who
wishes to speak in favor.
Of the house joint resolution.
And in the audience that was
just to speak in opposition or
on Zoom.
This is a legislative thing.
Members of the committee.
Uh, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So as
soon as Cervantes, can you just
talk about the amendment that
they did and what it means
trying to treat it and the bill
at the same time.
Yeah, um, and I'm trying to
think of who I have for your I
was just
we lose everybody else in the
house.
Yeah, uh, your question
illustrates an issue that we try
very hard in this committee to
do, which is we, whatever we
make amendments, we, we do, we
substitute so that we don't have
to try and
Uh track the amendments and, and
find them, but I'll, I'll try to
help you. So House Judiciary on
the first page made an amendment
into the title.
Uh, yeah, that's on online 12.
They struck provide through the
remainder of the of the bill.
And they substitute a different
title which would require the
governor to provide veto
messages on Bill's veto in Hoor
and Park and to provide that all
bills passed by the legislature
and not acted on by the governor
will become law.
So, um, this, this kind of more
clearly I think has a, a
consequence, I guess, for the
absence or at least of the
default, what happens when
there's not a detailed message,
but they, they added some
substantial language to
substitute for the, the title.
Then, um, on page 2,
22, they added the word.
On line 22 after the word
include they added the words a
substantive instructor and.
So read, the governor shouting
include a substantive
explanation for the veto.
And I believe that tracks the.
Uh how Judiciary Committee
amendments and you'll see those,
I think as um you'll see.
The footer is 268.1 is the
amendment from the House
Judiciary Committee.
Oh yes,
thank you very much.
268.1. What does that refer to?
Cause that's not on the bill.
That, that's the House Judiciary
Committee
amendment. OK. All right, thank
you. And that should be your I
hope it is.
Yeah, in the book. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Anyone else before we go to a
motion of a couple of things,
Mr. Chairman.
Um
So I support the policy, no
question. I think um
As, uh, particularly during the
session, you want a message to
You know, to wait for the
executive to communicate to the
legislature as to what would get
signed, you know, uh, so to, to
add a
Substantive explanation for the
veto is incredibly helpful for
for democracy, you know, where
the executive stands and you
know it's the bill.
You wait till the next executive
or you or you, or you
You know, alleviate the concerns
of the veto message.
The, um
The veto messages, this will
force all of the veto
explanations in those 20 and
that 20 day period. When I heard
of this joint resolution. I
anticipated a, you know, uh,
Signing the bills, vetoing the
bills, and then kind of
Getting to the pocket vetoes, so
to speak, in the next.
Week or so or month.
Do you see a problem with
A veto message with every single
vetoed bill in in that 20 day
period or should we, should we
adjust?
Uh, some.
Um, the chairman remembers me,
uh, I've not heard that that is
uh a difficulty for the
executive branch, so I'm not
here from the executive say
that's not workable deadline uh
for them to accomplish so I'm
gonna, I'm gonna trust that they
could do it, uh, Senator and I,
I think in most cases when I,
when a governor wishes to veto
the bill, they, I, I think by
asking them to give us a even a,
a message of some kind. I don't
think it has to be exhausted. I
don't think they're going to
give us all the reasons, but
they may.
So,
yeah, I think it's important
part of the dialogue between our
branch and the executive branch.
Some states do what they'd like
to do. I, I may still try and
run it even this late part of
the sessions. Some states have
an automatic veto override
session. In other words, they
automatically have time
scheduled after the session to
come back and evaluate details
from a governor, that's again, I
think part of having good
government, um, it, it's
unfortunate when the, when the
founders created our
constitution both federally and
at the state level.
They intended the legislature to
have the last word.
And that's important. We're
elected, we're the voice of the
people and of course, so is the
governor, uh, the voice of the
people and elected as well, but
the founder said the governor
doesn't get the last word we do.
We have the right to veto
override. We never do it.
We never do it, and the reason
we should be honest about it is
political, right? Uh, when we
have a governor who's a
Democrat, we're not going to
override her veto because it's
considered politically
embarrassing to a governor, and,
uh, no different when uh
Governor Martinez was a
Republican governor for 8 years.
We almost never overrode her
veto because the the
supermajority that's required
override a veto requires
participation by both by both
parties, right? You can't
override it uh governor's veto
without having cooperation
across.
lines, and that's a good thing,
but unfortunately, we're uh in
Washington certainly so
polarized that nobody would dare
cross a party line.
Does anybody really believe
there's going to be a veto
override of Donald Trump on
anything. My God.
Um, and then to have Elon Musk
financing your opponent in your
primary. I mean, who's gonna
ever vote to override a Trump
veto. It's not going to happen
in DC. I'm hoping that we'll
stay far away from that
polarized partisanship in DC
here in New Mexico, um, with our
citizen legislature. I think
that's a great thing. And so we,
I'm trying to remember when
we've uh overridden the veto of
a governor and even you'll enjoy
this story if you'll give me
just a moment more, even when we
are going to override a veto,
we're so polite in New Mexico.
So when, when
Martinez vetoed all of the
funding for NMSU, UNM, and all
of higher education. She vetoed
all of the fighting.
And, and what should have been a
simple matter of be to override,
we were so polite we didn't even
want to override her veto, so we
came back into session and
repassed the same budget for
higher education, giving her a
chance to sign it, a Mulligan,
if you will, uh, rather than do
a veto override, right, because
that was more polite to let her
sign it and essentially allow
her to save face.
Um, OK, that, that was then, but
I, I really do think we should
be more um
More willing to override vetoes
and I'm even told we may be
considering that even this
session. There may be some talk
about that going around here
too, so I I'm hoping that this
is part of a good governance
approach. Good, good dialogue
with the governor and, and
recognizing in the hands of a
governor that ultimately he or
she is still subject to us. Uh,
we have the final word.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Cervantes, the, um, this will
also create, I believe, a new
phenomenon in New Mexico
democracy where
A demo or a governor rather may
not wholly support.
initiative, but they will become
the this this notion of an
unsigned law.
Where there's gonna be laws
where the governor signs,
there's going to be laws where
the governor deliberately
doesn't sign.
What's your, what's your
opinion? Do you think that'd be
good for democracy.
We take advantage of that.
Um, it's kind of a little bit
like what we do in the
legislature. Sometimes we take a
walk, right? Let's, let's lay it
all out there. I'm looking at
all the faces like, oh my God,
he's gonna talk about taking a
walk, but we do it, right? It's
like, oh my God, I can't vote
for this. Oh my God, I can't
vote against this. What do I do?
I go to the lounge, uh, and
missed the boat, right? And,
and, um, we should acknowledge
to the public we do it, and, and
I've done it. And so I think
what you're describing center is
the opportunity for a governor
to take a walk, essentially to
say, uh, I'm not going to sign
this.
But I'm not gonna veto it, so
I'm gonna
Let you all guess what my
position was on this particular
issue and uh I imagine the
governors will take advantage of
that.
Thank you and then uh.
Uh, thank you. I think um yeah,
I think that, I think that'll
get a few more bills, uh, in
long. I think we should, that's,
I should think we should have a
veto session 2 or 3 days or
where there's bills that are
just unanimous or been vetoed
more than once. I also believe
we should have a couple of
league.
session to, to move moneys
around when uh when a project's
not fully funded.
And then also a special session
on the 50 or 100 good government
bills that just don't have the
traction to make it to the gov's
desk.
Cause I think we're just so
behind on a lot of statutory
things, but anyway, uh, for a
little emotion or I just wanted
to make a comment.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I was just
wondering what was required of a
message. Can a governor just
make a very short message, like,
Um, it doesn't meet my
requirements or something as
they're, but I mean, what is
required of a message?
The bill doesn't really address
that. It's a good question. The,
the House put on an amendment
that said the veto message has
to be substantive. That's a
pretty vague and ambiguous
standard, but there's no,
probably no word we could put in
there that would be any better
than that. So, we'll have to
leave it up to us and the
governor to see whether the veto
message is substantive to our
liking, but if it's not, we
override, um, that's really
quite simply it, and I, and I'm
hoping that all of this uh
avoids situations. I know it
would not happen with this
governor, but uh sometimes
governors use.
to s punitively, right? So if
you're on the, the list of, of
you didn't vote the way that the
governor might have wanted you
on a particular bill or do
something that uh particular
governor wanted to do, you get
your, your bill veto, right? Um,
I think this will cut back on
some of that, cause Governor
wants to come up with some.
Uh, reason that might be better
than you just really where
thaten Cervantes is under my
skin, so, uh, uh, the senator,
the bill doesn't address what,
what, how extensive the, the
message has to be. Well, there's
a message.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Some call me representative.
Never.
So I'm reminded of uh under uh
Governor Martinez.
Susannah
Uh, she vetoed 10 bills without
any message at all.
And we took it to the courts,
and we won.
So, um, I, I think, you know, I
don't like it or whatever. I
don't think that's gonna work
very well anymore if we do pass
this. So, uh, the rules around
the veto are pretty, they're
pretty solid. If you veto it,
you don't give a message, you're
breaking the law. And so the
Supreme Court agreed with us and
all those 10 bills, uh, just
went into law immediately.
Well, after we won the court
case, so I had one of them. It
was quite fun.
So, I, I, I'm glad they put in
septative, I mean, it doesn't
mean very much, but it means
something and it's better than
just an explanation.
So, anyway.
To remind everyone what's
happened over this issues over
the years.
complicated legal case and
you're right, the, the argument
was that she an ineffectively
vetoed those bills, and so the
court ruled, they became law,
despite that veto. I, I'm, I'm
glad that you considered suing
the governor to be fund Senator
Stewart, I've done it, and it's
not that much fun sometimes.
it was you, you have not lived
until your specifically
mentioned in the governor's
veto. So, uh, Governor Martinez
and I had a very special
relationship. Senator, Senator
Dewish.
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass on
HJR2.
We have a Du Past motion.
Any further discussion, any uh
opposition to the DuP Paz
motion. Please note all those
present, including the presenter
of voting in the affirmative.
He
We're going to House Bill 252.
Alrighty. Riverara, please
proceed, Madam Secretary. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Uh, it's my
pleasure to bring and thank you
members of the committee. It's
my pleasure to bring House Bill
252 before you, and this
establishes the kinship, uh,
caregivers, uh support pilot
program under the aging and
long-term Services Department to
assist kinship caregivers with
uh financial and legal support
for children in their care, and
we do have uh an amendment
before this.
Uh, um, Mr. Chair.
And I'll move up the amendment
for discussion purposes. It is a
5 77.1 representing the data.
And, uh,
yes, I don't think I have a copy
of it here.
You could get the presenter a
copy.
Don't you go ahead and explain
the amendment.
in the, in the first bill, uh,
we, we specified 5 counties by
name, and what we're just doing
this is to change that and uh
and insert in lieu of the 5
separate counties within 5 to 7
counties in the state. Uh, what
has happened is a lot of um our
Our funders are looking at
different counties, and so, and
there are more thunders coming
in that would like to do it in
different parts of the state,
and we didn't know we had them
on board before, so we've tried
to leave it.
A little open.
So you're removing the, the
names of the counties and saying
5 to 7.
And is there kind of assurance
that these 5 will be part of the
5 to 7 or?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, they can be, but not
necessary. Any questions on the
amendment?
Everyone clear on the amendment.
I'll go ahead and move the
amendment.
Any further discussion and the
opposition to that motion.
Please note all those present
voting affirmative, you have an
amended bill.
Going up present on the bill as
amended. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. What
this really does is it sets up a
pilot program.
Under the uh aging department,
um, to really help grandparents
who are raising grandchildren,
and I want to say grandparents
can that are raising
grandchildren are fict of kin,
and for those of you who don't
know, fictive Kim could be a
really close member of the
family that steps in when a
family is in crisis and takes
these kids in and raises them.
So, um, what you should know, we
have about 18,000 children that
are being raised by grandparents
right now or or
In in this state and of those,
only one, only 1 in 55 is really
under our current foster care
system. And I really struggled
with this issue for a long time,
Mr. Chair, because
I, I knew that these
grandparents needed help, and I
knew they really needed
financial assistance, uh, but a
lot of them for a lot of
reasons, don't want to enter
into a formal custody
arrangement. Um, and, and with
this body, all of us really
working on behavioral health
issues and providing money for
that, you know, the hope is for
these families that many of
these parents are are in
addiction situations, and they
hope that they can get out and
they want to keep those
that communication opened so
that hopefully this parent will
get in a recovery program and
hopefully they will get reunited
with these parents again. So I
think that's the hope of many
grandparents. In the meantime,
uh, they're really struggling. A
lot of them are unlimited uh
incomes, a lot of them on Social
Security, and so, um, what we
worked with, thank, thank you,
and I haven't introduced my um
expert. It's Emily Kaunenbach.
She's the uh she's
the uh director of the uh aging,
um, of the aging department for
the state of New Mexico, and she
worked we worked very closely on
this together and with funders
and, and basically what the
Department of Aging will do is
that they will, they will help,
they will hire people to help
these grandparents or can
navigate through what is
available to them at the
federal, state and local level.
That's their first job. And
then, um, and, and what, what
program
items are available to them is
really important. What are they
entitled to? And then we will
also provide legal services, and
that's important too. When you
make that transfer from uh just
being a, a, a primary caregiver
to really formal custody. A lot
of questions come into play, and
they need legal help in making
those decisions. Uh, we will
provide uh monthly training, uh,
we'll have, uh, you know, um,
navigators at the local level
and they'll provide.
training, they'll do monthly
home visits. They'll work to
create a support group, because,
you know, how do we get through
most problems in our life with
our family and friends. So these
people will will also have a
support group so they can work
together, learn what the
problems are, and, and that's
how that will work. And then I
really struggled again with the
anti-donation clause. How do I
get around this? And then for
those of you who don't know, I,
I used to be, I was the founding
director of Los Alamos National
Laboratory Foundation.
and I, in that capacity, I also
served as the uh president of
the New Mexico Association of
Grantmakers for about 4 years.
So I know what foundations can
and and can't do. And I was
talking to some foundations and
and they said, well, why don't
we try to provide, you know,
300,000 a year for 3 years, and
it's a pilot project for 3
years, and we'll try and give
these families uh a monthly
stipend of about $500. So,
They would take on that role,
they would have the MOU with the
Department of Aging to do that.
And again, this is a pilot
program to see how it will work,
and we will have an evaluation
built in uh for proof of concept
so that we can get back
hopefully 3 years from now and
kind of lay out the state
program and and with that, uh,
Mr. Chair, I stand for
questions.
Thank you so much, members of
the committee.
Senator Joe Mountain.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
I'm.
Oh
Uh, you're concerned about the
anti-donation and so this
appropriation is really for the
department to sort of navigate,
uh, have staff to work on, uh,
identifying uh resources for
families.
Uh, the question I have, are
there a lot of resources for
families in this situation?
Pardon me, I'm, I'm sorry. I was
wondering, are there a lot of
resources for family in this
situation?
Well, actually, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, uh, Senator O'Malley,
not a lot, but, but some
foundations like there's a
foundation in Rio Riba, if you
need a bed for a kid, you can
get a bed. It's, it's a local
thing and some foundations are
doing stipends, but nobody's
taken on a role so far of doing
monthly stipends of $500 for 50
families over a three-year
period. So, so we haven't had
that kind of consistent, you
know, monetary.
Hope that I think will make a
big difference in the lives of
these families, but again, it's
a pilot project and evaluations
built in, I think we'll be able
to come back next year and the
year after that and the year
after that, and kind of give an
update and see, tell you how
it's progressing.
I, I'm just curious about that,
the Anna because I know that
that's been the first discussion
about basic income, uh, has been
for a while, uh, and that would
be a direct
You know, um,
Resource or money to a family,
so I guess I was curious about
the end of the nation beast.
And
Why that is so.
Well, nobody, like I said, the
foundations have there's
foundations like the change
agent that come in and do an
immediate allotment for a family
that's in need, but, but
nobody's kind of taking this on
over a 3 year period.
Uh, to do this.
He was chair.
Thank you, Senator Duvi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this. And I just, I'm, I think I
probably already know the answer
to this, but just to make clear,
because this is gonna live in
aging and long-term services.
Uh, but
And, and a lot of grandparents
are going to benefit from this.
But you could be next of kin,
you can be victim of kin, and,
and not be the the population
that is typically served by
aging and long-term services.
Uh, so this is not going to be
limited to the two grandparents,
correct? Right, it's, it's, it's
people who are taking care of
kids, and it could be victim. I,
I have family friend that sees
an emergency and wants to help
these kids know these kids now.
Or or a brother or sister aunt
and uncle or or any kinship
relationship.
Great. And, and those same
services that would be provided
by the department secretary
would be provided, even though
these are not, uh, older
symptoms, uh, that, that are
typically served by your
department. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Senator, we already provide a
lot of those services. So for
example, the legal assistance
and referral, uh, and education
piece that's mentioned in the
bill, we currently have a
contract with Pegasus to do that
specifically for kinship
caregiving, and guardianship.
Um, and so we serve adults in
the aging and long-term services
department, and so, um, I think
we can easily, this aligns with
the work we're already doing
the, the navigation, the benefit
counseling, and, but we'd have
to work with other agencies,
obviously, uh, ECD CYFD HCA,
Department of Health, um, to
identify all the resources
available. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much and I
appreciate your, your amendment,
uh, when I
at this pill, I thought, what a
great bill. I'm so sad, my
county.
As a as a as a part of the, the
pilot program, so, but thank you
for bringing us.
Thank you and lastly, oh yes,
Senator Thorn.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Help me understand that. So what
does the
But to see why do in regards to
this type of situation, or are
they involved in this at all
when, when they say a
grandparent is involved.
Um, thank you for that question,
Mr. Chair and Senator Thornton,
we purposely didn't see why it
didn't to be involved because
most grandparents really are
afraid of CYFD. Don't want them
to get involved. There's also
kind of a catch 22 in all of
this, and
And when it's, it's, it deals
with the federal government.
So if you are an abused child,
and a reported to CYFD. Then
they, then you can enter into
that foster care system, right?
And you've been, you know,
declared and abused child, and
then if a family member steps
forward, then they can get that
allotment, which is, I think,
about $6078 a month for kids
right now. However, if you go to
the hospital and you see this
baby who has been born.
With, you know, um, drug
withdrawal.
And uh a relative steps forward
and says, I'll take this baby.
Well then you haven't really
been declared abused, right? So
it had the baby hasn't been
abused because it goes home to a
safe house that is protecting
and providing for this child.
Well then, it is catch 22, then
you aren't allowed to get a uh a
stipend from the uh federal
government, and that pays for
3/4 of the foster care money
that goes to every family who
has legal custody if the child
has been declared abused. So,
That's kind of how it works. I,
we couldn't, I couldn't get
around that. I'm, I'm still
trying to work on that
provision, but that's gonna take
a little longer, and in the
meantime, what we're trying to
do is help these families who
have stepped forward, taken on
this responsibility for the care
of these children and help them
financially.
Thank you for that.
um Emily could add something.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and,
and Senator, I do want to
mention that CYFD has a program
already working with kinship
caregivers, and so this is not
going to duplicate that. It
would only enhance and align
with what's going on. So in
those, uh, you can see in the
bill the eligibility
requirements will have to be
developed and so, you know,
there may be some individuals,
families that are already
involved in the protective
services system that could be
kinship caregivers.
And those individuals um may be
getting services already in the
CYFD system and this program is
not intended to duplicate that,
and it's just we partner.
Thank you for that. Um,
Mr. Chair, so what, what are the
required qualifications to
become a kinship caregiver. What
are the requirements?
Uh, basically, uh, to be a
caregiver would be somebody
who's already stepped up, taking
care, they're taking care of
these kids, they haven't in
their house, they're raising
them, uh, you know, they're
getting them to school, they're
getting them medical, I mean,
they, they take care their
basically raising these kids
right now, and that would be we
would set up a set of re you
know, rules and regulations and
and that would be set up by the
Department of Aging, but it's,
it's pretty clear that these are
families that are already taking
care of these kids. OK. So
help me out here. So if the
person that was taking care of
this kid was not.
Um
Relative, maybe not the
immediate grandparent.
Um, not even blood related, but
since I'm gonna take care of
this child.
Is that, would that still fall
under the current.
kinship caregiver, Mr. Chair and
Senator Thornton, that's called
a fictive kin. That's what you
call thick of kin. That's the
legal definition.
OK. Thank you for that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, so what other
specific organizations, uh,
Are you partnering with that
would support this effort? You
talked about legal aid and, and,
uh, other kinds of assistance
that would be part of this
program, this prototype program.
Who are those organizations that
would be supporting this effort?
Uh, some of the organizations
include the Los Alamos National
Laboratory Foundation, uh, the
change agents Foundation, um,
Dale Foundation, uh, we're
working with Kellogg. There's a
number of foundations that are
starting to come forward too
because they're hearing about
this, and, and we keep talking
to people, so more people from
the south are coming some
foundations from the south are
coming up to us and saying, how
can we be part of this program?
OK.
That's all, Mr. Tay. Thank you.
moved too fast on.
And
still number House Bill 252.
It's no committee sub. It's the
first one all day.
I thank you, thank you. There's
been a motion for a due pass its
amended any further discussion,
any opposition to the DuPass
motion.
Uh, please vote. Please note,
uh, 3 people in opposition and
the rest voting in favor. So you
have a due pass us a minute.
Uh, let's go to 318. Yeah,
sorry, sorry.
Make sure it has an an unfair
trade practices Act law. It goes
back to my, uh, what I've been
told goes back to the days when
We wanted to attack things like
rolling back odometers on used
vehicles and so forth. The the
law, the unfair Trade Practices
Act is a consumer is the basis
of our consumer laws in New
Mexico and it's intended to
Um, create disincentives and
impose penalties and allow for
legal fees recovery in cases
where the supplier of goods or
services does so in a deceptive
way or misleading way.
This bill updates that act in um
and other areas of law
principally with a focus on
firearms.
We earlier this session passed a
law to make it illegal to be in
possession of a so-called glock
switch or weapon conversion
device. We've made it illegal to
be in possession. The goal of
this bill is to begin, uh, to
allow for us to have gun
manufacturers manufacture their
products in a way that cannot be
converted and goes one step
back, and so this allows for the
um uh cause of action on the, on
free trade pacts act against
those who
deceptively uh or unfairly may
engage in trade practices, and
that's why you'll see all the
definitions that relate to
weapons in, in this particular
bill.
There's another reason for doing
so, Congress.
And in acting federal law have
granted some pretty broad, I
know some will be heard in
opposition to this perspective,
but, um, Congress granted some
pretty broad immunities to gun
manufacturers, um, and, um, it's
important because you hear about
that from time to time, but the
the congressional immunities or
the limitations on actions
against gunman makes has some
exceptions, and one of the
exceptions is really one of the
goals of this bill as well too,
is to try and thread a needle
where Congress said.
There there are some
circumstances when, when, uh, an
individual should have recourse
to the courts it related to the
manufacture of a gun.
Uh, or a firearm weapon. And,
and this, the purpose of this
bill is to, to work within that
exception under the federal law.
So just very briefly, uh,
section one makes a change to
the business Corporation Act.
This is a section that would
allow for New Mexican courts to
exercise jurisdiction of a
foreign corporation.
There's an important component
to this bill as well too. It's
the recognition that that today
so much of our buying is online,
uh, with online marketplace, and
so if I buy a product on Amazon
or otherwise and it's uh if I
purchase it online, it's
delivered in the state of New
Mexico. If it does injury, it
does harm.
We should provide a means and
mechanism for people to, to have
a remedy.
And, and in our new economy,
this is uh we we're the law is
slow to catch on, that this is
the way we buy, this is the way
products are put into the stream
of commerce and the the first
section is to allow New Mexico
courts to recognize some
jurisdiction. It's also intended
to address, uh, a court decision
that said maintaining just a
registered agent alone is not
adequate to allow for that
jurisdiction, so it won't do us
any good to allow for a cause of
action against different
manufacturers of products and
then, and then not be able to
do.
in New Mexico.
Section 2 of the bill has a
number of definitions for
firearms, firearms accessories.
Um, the, the, um,
Uh, the question in a proceeding
committee was where do these
definitions come from? I had to
go back and check with our staff
where we pulled these room.
These are, I believe, all going
to be mirroring federal law with
the definitions of what is a, a
weapon.
Also in that same section is a a
uh some additional.
Listed um examples of what when
our law are unfair, uh, and
deceptive trade practices, so
you'll see that the existing law
has a number of things that
we've already enumerated by, by
number of paragraphs in the
existing law to be specifically
described or defined as an
unfair or deceptive trade
practice and, and what this does
is this adds to that list,
knowing, they knowingly and uh
I'll emphasize the word
knowingly, the knowingly
manufacturing, advertising,
distributor.
and offering for sale firearms,
and again, I'll emphasize this
part contrary to the laws of New
Mexico and the United States.
Um, and, and unconscionable is
defined as something that would
violate federal law, so you'll
hear opposition to this bill
from uh some of the
representatives of the gun
industry and, and people who
enjoy uh having access to
firearms, but, but I, I will
have you when they, when they
make those uh uh opposition
comments known that you'll
emphasize the word that that for
there to be an action against
The manufacturer of a gun or
somebody who's advertising or
distributing or selling a gun,
they have to do so contrary to
the laws of the state of New
Mexico. They have to do so in
violation of state or federal
law for this law to become
effective. And so uh uh it's
that knowing standards, the
knowing manufacturing and
advertising, it becomes
important.
Um, section 4,
has a certain exemptions and uh
that here we're, again, we're
trying to make sure that those
exemptions that already existed
under the law are tightened.
Um
The section 5 is just gender and
clean up language under the
existing act, which in many
cases hasn't been modified for
some period of time.
Section 6 relates to the
settlement of unfair trade
practices claims right now under
the existing law, certain claims
could be settled with the
Attorney General's office and
the issue here is to make sure
that that a party who agrees to
settle these unfair trade
practice claims with the AG
doesn't then have that used
against them. We want to
encourage people to, to work
through these things in
cooperation with the Attorney
General's office and this limits
this this section of the bill
limits some of the admissibility
of, of some of those settlement
agreements.
Uh, Section 7 will probably get
a lot of attention from the
opponents right now we have
private remedies in the unfair
trade practices Act.
I'll note for the non-lawyers,
this, this is an important part
of our law, because you're going
to hear this a lot throughout
your time here on this
committee. uh, so let's take a
moment to talk about the
American rule and the English
rule. The English rule uh
allowed for the loser, if you
will, in litigation to recover
their attorneys' fees from from
the winner.
And, uh, in the United States,
the American rule generally does
not allow for that. In other
words, each party generally
bears their own legal fees in
any kind of litigation, that's
the American rule.
It has a nice genesis, the idea
was the, the English rule made
it very hard for uh the lesser
um segments of the population to
be able to sue the king.
You couldn't sue the king,
because if you did, and you
lost, the king would recover
their legal fees or their costs
against you, the uh person who
dared to challenge the king and
destroy you, like financially.
And so the American rule says
we're going to allow uh the
common person, the common man
and common woman to be able to
challenge the king and not do so
with the Jeopardy for everything
they've got. So that's generally
the American rule and the
English rule in in some, what
with the unfair tradede
Practices Act is
does something in the law that
we do from time to time, which
is we do allow specifically for
a prevailing party to recover
their attorney's fees. Uh, a
good example of that is civil
rights legislation. So in our
civil rights law, if you sue on
the basis of gender
discrimination or race
discrimination or other examples
of, of, of prohibited classes
and distinctions, we allow for
you to recover your attorneys'
fees because we want to
encourage those lawsuits. And we
also recognize that in those
cases, the recovery may be very
small financially, but we
still want to have these
lawsuits brought to try and
eliminate gender discrimination
and and race discrimination. So
the unfair Trade Practices Act
does the same thing. It has for
uh certain penalties and right
now you'll see that there are
what what here are what are
called statutory damages. So
what would happen in some cases
you may sue for an unfair
deceptive trade practice, and
you may not be able to show any
damages. You may not be able to
show you were financially harmed
in some way, but we still want
to incentivize these, and this
existing laws so we have what
are called
stat ut ory damages are set
forth in our section says, we're
gonna, we're gonna recognize
this amount of damage at a
minimum, um, and in this act, we
have an alternative. It usually
says actual damages or a minimum
statutory images.
You'll also see an existing law
that we have uh what's called
treble damages, that's lawyer
speak for 3 times. So we call
treble damages and we award
those again under the existing
law where the damages are shown
to have been willfully, uh,
done.
What the bill does is increase
those statutory damages and the
treble damages, uh, which have
been in, in our statue for a
very long time and unaltered,
uh, to much more consistent with
where we should have damages
today, so we're increasing those
from $100 to $10,000 from $300
to $10,000.
Um, there is a significant, and
I know some concern with a
firearms specific damage, uh,
you'll see that on page 17 of
the bill.
There's also addition of a cause
of action for the online
marketplace as they said last
time I bought a firearm, I
bought it online, um, and it's
because I couldn't buy it here
in New Mexico. Uh, I couldn't
find it, so I ordered it online,
it came in, it was shipped to a
dealer where I had to go.
and, and do the paperwork and
meet the qualifications and the
dealer is the one who had to
complete the transaction, but I
bought the firearms effectively
online, um, as I said, most of,
most of how we do things today.
Um, subparagraph L on page 20
again, deals with the issue of
jurisdiction, allowing us to
bring
Lawsuits in New Mexico in this,
in this kind of modern
marketplace, um, section 8 has
another civil penalty increase
from 5000 to $25,000. I'll note
and emphasize the words language
up to, so that's, that's a
maximum limit, not a specified
limit.
And section 9 is existing
language with regard to civil
investigative demand that gets
back to the attorney General's
office, uh, Section 1011 relate
to advertising, uh, components
of the unfair Trade Practices
Act, so there's a lot in here to
unpeel, but I'm looking forward
to your questions. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Calvantes, so there's some folks
who have signed up, uh,
proponents of the bill.
And we'll go with them and then
we'll hear from the opponents so
despite folks speaking in favor
of the bill, so why don't you
guys take about a minute, minute
and a half.
To make your points. We have uh
Brent Moore.
Kelly's stout Sanchez.
Brent Moore here.
Miss Doubt Sanchez.
So text them if you're and then
Sid Lopez.
There.
Since they're not here, you have
2 minutes.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
Senators of the committee.
My name is Sid Lopez. I'm a
lobbyist with the New Mexico
Trawers Association, and I am a
trial lawyer member.
Trial lawyers promote justice,
access to justice and fairness
for injured people by
safeguarding the rights of
victims, particularly the rights
to trial by jury, the
constitutional right.
And ensuring, and, and in doing
so ensure individuals can seek
legal recourse when harmed.
Trial lawyers stand in support
of Senate Bill 318, because this
bill helps consumers by creating
a meaningful, uh, penalty for
unfair business practices by
raising minimum fines uh as uh
Mr. Chair Cervantes has
explained to the committee. This
bill will help keep New Mexico
safe by creating real mon
monetary penalties and
importantly, in
of relief against firearms
dealers who unlawfully put guns
on our streets.
We urge the committee to
consider this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll now jump on the
zoom. Do we have a Richard Mason
and Anne Maxwell.
All right.
So Richard Mason and Anne
Maxwell must be zooming another
committee, uh.
We now go to the opponents, um,
Darren.
Lasoriusio,
Carlos Santag, William.
Ironson, Alison Riley, Eric
Rasmussen. So everyone should
have about 2 minutes or so to
finish their points.
Please introduce yourselves as
well. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
Darren Lasort. I work for the
National Shooting Sports
Foundation. We are the firearm
trade firearm industry trade
association. Um, I want to thank
the sponsor for meeting with us
earlier and hearing our
concerns. We are opposed to
Centel 318. This legislation
will destroy and bankrupt the
firearm industry in the state.
There is no question about it.
Um, I want to remind you that we
are the only industry in the
country that's necessary for
your constituents to exercise a
constitutional right. You may
not like.
Yes, but thousands of your
constituents respect us, need
us, and appreciate us. So, to a
point on this bill, um, page 6,
the bottom of page 6, to talk
about a provision that will
destroy the industry. There is
language there that says if I
put an ad out that tends to
mislead, that's the language
tends to mislead. No one in this
room knows what that means.
Not a single person and someone
hears that ad, they can sue me
as a firearm dealer for
$250,000. So I put an ad out
that says that a particular gun
is effective and safe for home
defense.
There are a lot of people in
this room who don't believe that
any firearm could be safe or
effective for any circumstance.
That tends to mislead them. They
file a lawsuit that's a quarter
of a million dollars. So this is
existing language as the sponsor
pointed out, but the reason this
is not being abused today is
because the maximum awards are
$100 or $300. This takes it to a
quarter of a million dollars. I
can guarantee you that that's
plenty of incentive to abuse
this statute. That is, by the
way, an 83,000.
% increase over the existing
$300 limit.
I want to address one last
falsehood, and that is that the
federal statute dealing with
immunity for the firearm
industry gives us some special
protection. It gives us none.
What that statute simply says is
that we are to be treated like
every other industry in the
country. The reason that exists
is because we were being
litigated into bankruptcy, um,
with reckless lawsuits, we can
still be held liable for
defective products. We can still
be, um, sued for uh an illegal
act that
leads to harm, we can still be
sued for transferring a firearm
to someone we know or reasonably
should know is going to do harm
with that firearm.
We have exactly the same
liabilities as every other
industry in the country. Please
oppose Senate Bill 318 if this
legislation does treat the
firearm industry like every
other industry, we might be OK
with it, but that's not the
state of affairs right now.
Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Nick
Tuccio, state director with the
National Rifle Association and
uh to follow Mr. Lesor's
comments. I would like to hone
in on the consumer aspect of
this, uh, with an increase in
the liabilities that firearm
dealers would be exposed to,
that would have a knock-on
effect of these businesses
remaining to be open and to be
able to provide a venue for New
Mexicans to express their 2nd
Amendment rights. In the event
that
these firearm dealers could not
operate.
This would create an environment
that would be deleterious for
New Mexicans and um would result
in gray areas and activities
that, um, at are occurring on an
open space now would be
occurring at a much less
observed level now. Thank you.
like you missed chair Senate. My
name is Eric Rasmussen. I am the
president of the New Mexico
Firearms Industry Association,
and I represent all the small
FFLs here in the state of New
Mexico, um, all the shops have
researched the possibility of
what should happen if this be
enacted. Would we be able to get
insurance? Would we be able to
get bonded? Would we be able to
be covered for anything like
this? The answer was unanimously
no, this would not happen. Uh,
one of the comments.
From one of our members was 1/10
of one award would destroy us.
For some reason, there's this
misconception that uh we make a
large amount of money, uh, in,
in our industry, which we do
not. Uh, it's certainly not one
that holds a large profit
margin. Um,
This would make each and every
gun store in New Mexico. We do
also have some major
manufacturers here in New
Mexico, um, and this would also
affect them, so
On top of that, we're losing
hundreds if not thousands of
jobs here in the state of New
Mexico, should this pass.
Uh
Gun stores are the last line of
defense in preventing crime. We
don't want criminals to, to have
have a firearms any more than
police officers do, um, we talk
amongst each other, we warn each
we warn each other about
pretentious straw purchases,
suicide attempts, we communicate
with each other. If we're not in
existence, then this is going to
move to the black market. Um, we
sent out letters to all of the
representatives prior to the uh
meeting or prior to the.
and hopes that we could meet
with you and talk about some
meaningful, um, changes in the
laws and and actually work on
something, uh, that would work.
In addition, we have one in with
one of our members, he has 3 of
the 4, I believe, indoor ranges
in the state, which many law
enforcement agencies utilize,
which is Caliber's indoor
shooting range. Should those be,
those will also be closed down,
and law enforcement agencies are
going to have to find other
places to train, because this is
one of the places, many of the
agencies are allowed to utilize,
uh, to, to perform their
training. Um, again, we stand in
strong opposition to this bill,
where small business folks just
like
Everybody else's and uh we're
providing for the community and
the safety for the community.
Thank you.
Good evening, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, and we're in
opposition of this bill. Um, our
reasons are different from some
of the previous speakers, so our
reasons are the bill imposes
liability on online marketplaces
for third party seller conduct,
treating them like retailers
that choose to sell firearms, a
marketplace that merely provides
a platform for listings will be
held jointly and severely liable
for any violations including
firearms, destructive devices or
related accessories. This is
troubling because
these platforms function as
neutral classified listings and
holding them liable disregards
their role as facilitators
rather than active sellers. The
bill also extends the definition
from individuals selling goods
and services to include every
product on all marketplaces in
New Mexico. This bill cast an
excessively wide net, this
expansion threatens the subject
online marketplaces to
unmanageable array of
liabilities.
These provisions conflict with
long standing principles of
internet liability and risk
disrupting a vital service in
New Mexico's buyers and sellers,
and for those reasons, we
respectfully oppose. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, my name is
William Fire Eisen. I'm a
retired computer scientist here
in Santa Fe, and a constituent
of Senator Wirth. I don't
represent anybody except myself.
I testified against this bill
last week, so I'll only repeat
two points. This bill singles
out New Mexico firearms
businesses for special large
penalties beyond all other New
Mexico businesses. I suggest
that this is not fair.
It will drive up insurance rates
for all New Mexico firearms
dealers.
This bill also encourages
private third-party lawsuits by
organizations that have not been
personally harmed by an alleged
violation.
Please don't encourage this
tactic in our state. I urge you
to delete section 7 paragraphs C
and D.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. That does it for the
opponents just before we go to
committee, one of the fines was
raised from 5000.
to 25,000, I thought that was
excessive until I realized that
$5000 fine was, was created in
1970, and if you do what
inflation rates from 1970 to all
that, that fine would be $41,000
so,
but anyway.
Members of the committee.
Center works. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um,
I think it would be helpful to
just kind of let us know now and
for the folks in the audience.
And for trade Practices Act has
been around for quite some time.
Just
You know, in terms of the
businesses that currently are
governed and are subject to the
unfair trade practices, just
give us a, a sense of the
different types of businesses
now that deal with the existing
statute the way it is.
Good question, because uh the,
the opposition will tell you
there's a parade of horrors that
are coming. This law has been in
place for, I think since the
60s, um and
it applies to you and me,
Senator, if you, anybody who
offers goods or services, I
offer services if I hold myself
out as being able to deliver a
certain service and I
misrepresent that I'm subject to
this law. Anybody who sells any
product is subject to this law.
It is, it is a broad consumer.
Um
Protective piece of legislation
that we enacted a long time ago,
and I, I
I can't remember ever seeing a.
brought into the unfair trade
practice Act. I, I've never
brought one. I don't know
whether I'm looking around the
room to see whether any of you
all said Duke that she has, um,
and, and saidor has too, so you
could tell me from your
experience how it's gone, but,
um, and interestingly, what the
unfair Trade Practices Act has
when we talked about, I
appreciate you giving me the
time to go by the American rule
and the English rule, the unfair
Trade Practices Act does
something very, very unique,
which is, it allows for a
shifting of attorneys' fees to
the person who brings a lawsuit
if they do so with a ground.
lawsuit. I don't think we do
that anywhere else in the law. I
don't think there's anywhere
else in the law that if an
individual brings a lawsuit,
they can be subject themselves
to pay the other side's legal
fees, and we do that in this act
to try and assure balance, uh,
but again, the law originated as
I understand it with used car
sales and I'll look forward to
you all telling me where you
brought claims before and how
they've gone for you. It's not
an area of law I practiced it. I
think that's always important
because uh earlier in the
session, the suggestion was that
I'm, um, my position on criminal
defense law.
is based on my practice as a
criminal defense lawyer, which
I'm not, uh, and so I, I don't
do these claims. This is not
about me trying to um feather my
nest in any way, shape, or at
all, um, their work, but, um,
really any, the answer to your
question succinctly is anybody
who offers goods or services in
New Mexico cannot do so in a
false, misleading or deceptive
way or they open themselves up
to this liability. And Mr.
Chair, the language that was
cited on page 6, the existing
language about an unfair
deceptive trade practice that
may or tends to or does deceive
or mislead any person and
includes, and it was represented
that the world would end with
that language, but that's the
language that applies to all of
us, correct? in place, I think
since the inception of the bill,
so that again, the opponent was
focusing on that language, but
you're right, that's been in
place and this bill doesn't
change that at all. And Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair, uh, I also
want to focus on the existing
law, uh, in section 7,
there was a representation
that the current damages are
$100 and $300 but that's not
correct. Um, again, it's
Uh, pages on 16, um, subsection
A deals with injunctive relief
subsection B, you're entitled
currently, so the claim that
would be brought against you or
me or any other business to
recover actual damages under the
first scenario or the sum of
what now is $100 you're raising
that, but it's actual, actual
damages or in other words,
basically it's whichever is
greater. So, if you've got an
actual damages that are
$500,000 you're gonna get
$500,000 not $100 isn't that
correct? That's what I refer to,
Senator, as you know, what we,
uh, lawyers will refer to as
statutory damages. It's
essentially saying this is the
this is the bottom, this is the,
the threshold because again, we
expect that it's going to cost
somebody $10,000 to bring a
lawsuit. Well, and Mr. Chair, if
you keep going down to the next.
Portion of subsection B, if
there's willful.
Uh, deceptive and engagement and
unfair trade practices, then
it's
Actual damage is trebled.
So again, we've made a policy
decision to treble those
damages.
For $300 whichever is greater.
So I mean, Mr. Chair, I find it
interesting that the gentleman
from the
From the firearms industry said
they could live with the, the
language like it is, and I think
you should probably think about
that, because quite frankly, you
know, we do have this new
language and in section 7, but
the reality is that the remedies
that currently exist under the
unfair trade practices are
pretty darn.
So, they've been around since
1967, 67. And, and that's how it
applies. So I just want to
highlight that the idea that
somehow, you know, that you're
$250,000.
He violation is is some
outrageous amount actually.
Currently the statute allows for
treble treble damages plus
attorneys' fees. And again, I
think that's, that was
Part of the policy reason and
putting this act together is to
give private individuals the
ability to bring these to bring
these claims. So I just wanted
to highlight again, what you're
doing here and I appreciate, um,
you know, you bring in the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Deit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
yeah, we have, we have probably
the best, uh, unfair practices
Act in the country.
New Mexico, um, and I, I think
this makes it even stronger. Um,
I do want to give you a little
bit of crap though, Mr. Chair,
because
Well there's anyone else's
bill.
You would be saying, so like on
page uh
Page 25.
We are saying, um.
There's language here that is
true whether we say it or not.
Uh,
They're at, it doesn't need to
be any intent to deceive or to
take unfair advantage, and that
those intents are not required.
That is true already. Now, I,
I'm giving you crap. I, uh
Uh, Mr. Cummings explained to me
why there is language in here
that I think we
We would not usually have it
here and it's because of the
interplay with the federal law.
And so there's stuff that we
have to lay out, um, under that
federal law in our state
statutes. Um, but, uh,
What else? I'm just, I, I relish
the opportunity to.
To, to do this. Um,
Cause you do it so often on
other people's, uh, on page 13.
These are exceptions. Nothing in
the unfair res that shall apply
to, and you're adding in, uh,
transactions for which a person
is immune from soot.
Um
That we would usually.
If this was, was in a different
context, you would be tearing
this bill up for that, uh,
because there's absolutely no
reason to say it because it is
already true if you are immune
from suit, you are, you are
automatically uh exempt. Now,
here, because of the, the
interplay with the federal law,
uh, I'm not gonna offer any
amendments. I think we do have
to lay out all these things that
we wouldn't lay out otherwise.
But I'll just say next time we
have a bill in front of us,
where we're all like, why are
you saying this?
that we think is dumb and
they're like, well, there's this
other law you don't know about
that requires us to say it. We
should maybe
Maybe be a little more
understanding of that.
Be more reflective,
Senator Do, um,
look, I, uh, I hope that I'm the
kind of individual who grows.
And one thing that we learn in
politics is never to admit you
made a mistake and never to say
you were in error, that's kind
of rule one of politics, right?
And uh I've learned a long time
ago as a father and as a
husband, it's really a very
empowering to say I was wrong,
um, and, uh, or I've learned or
I've grown from an experience
and so I appreciate your
comments, which is, yeah,
sometimes my words come back to
haunt me, and they should, uh, I
should learn to grow.
experience.
Well, I hope so. I'm glad I was
on the webcast.
But, uh, but Mr. Chair, no, I
think, um,
I think this is this, this, uh,
only makes uh New Mexico
stronger as a, a state that
protects consumers, um, and
And rather than, uh, being an
unfair focus on firearm folks in
the firearms industry, I think
it actually puts them on a on a
level playing field with
everyone else, providing goods
and services in the state. Uh,
under the statute. So thank you
for bringing this.
Thank you. So we're
contemplating a of
fairer and kinder in a
judiciary. That's historically.
Senator Thorn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and Mr.
Chair, um,
As you know, we're none of us
are lawyers on this side of the
aisle. None of us are lawyers on
this side of the aisle, but, uh,
I, I have a few questions.
Our firearms currently excluded
or exempt from deceptive or
unfair business practices under
under Mexico law today.
So they're not exempt.
OK.
So, uh, and the firearm
industry, uh, so all of their
products and the firearms state
right now are subject to the
same laws and liabilities as
other industries under the
current unfair practices. Is
that correct? No, it's, I
disagree with you on that again,
um.
somebody's pointing something
around.
Everything, everybody OK?
Uh, Senator, um,
I would, I would answer your
question, no. Um, there are
certain protections under
federal law that suggestion was
made that that's not the case. I
would have to respectfully
disagree with anybody who, who
doesn't read federal law to say
that, that the opportunity to
sue a gun manufacturer is very
prescribed, very, very limited
and I, I don't know how often
you've heard about, uh,
successful lawsuits brought
against gun manufacturers, I
guess I should always qualify
that because you started by
saying you're not a lawyer.
So everybody can bring a
lawsuit, um, Usher a little more
than 100 bucks and some paper to
file a lawsuit, but I, I put the
other on a successful lawsuit.
I, I don't bring lawsuits that
aren't going to be successful.
So, uh, your, your question is,
are there protections? I, I
think there are protections for
gun manufacturers that don't
exist for other industries or
other products.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, Mr.
Chair, do you, so if a gun
manufacturer has a defective
gun.
And it's defective because of
the manufacturing.
You don't think that this law
allows to sue the manufacturer.
Is that what you're saying?
So I'm gonna, the product is
defective. That's what I'm
asking.
So I'm gonna, I'm gonna pick
apart your question
by quibbling as a lawyer for a
moment. When you say your
product is defective.
Uh, a product can be defective
in its manufacture, but it can
also be defective in its design.
Um, and this is, for example,
this is one area of the law that
we practice in which is warranty
claims, in other words,
you can bring a claim for a
defective design and um I think
that this bill is intended to
try and and begin to look at
that issue. So to your, your
point is if a gun manufacturer
manufactures a gun and uses say
an inferior grade of steel, um,
and didn't intend to, and they
become malfunctions and
somebody's injured, I would
think that that is actionable
right now under existing laws.
To your example, what you
by defective, but I'll, I'll
conclude here at the end, I'm
gonna tell you what I'm really,
really thinking about, uh,
Senator about this bill and and
guns in general, but, but, um,
When you say a gun defective, I
think a product could be
defective by its design.
Um, and I think that that's
probably true with regard to
firearms. I think, I think some
firearms are defected by their
very design, which is again why,
why this is put in the context
of the so-called block switch or
the weapon conversion is, I
think the goal here is to
recognize that some guns could
be manufactured in a different
way or designed in a different
way, but they could not be
readily converted and I suspect
that if we pursue this
aggressively enough, we're going
to find that some gun
manufacturers know they could
manufacture a safer product.
And purposefully do not do so,
so it can be converted.
Well, that's good to know cause
it, it seems like that may be
where this, this law is taking
us, is that you're wanting to go
after, uh,
Current practices in terms of
manufacturing, and now you're
going to tell them how to design
their guns so that they cannot
be converted in any form or
fashion.
That's my understanding of what
you just said.
Use the examples last uh
committee and again, I, I hope
to summarize this when we get to
it, but, um, well, I'll bring it
up now, center. Um, I'm old
enough to remember the Pinto,
the Ford Pinto, um, where that
vehicle when struck from behind
the gas tank would explode.
Or knew that the Pinto would
explode and kill and burn
people, but they did not change
the design and not take it off
the market because it was less
expensive for them to pay uh for
deaths than it was to pull the,
the product off the market. Um,
and I, I said that, I've said
this before, my profession and
me and others who are travelers
in the room are maligned, but
I'm, I'm sometimes very proud of
what we do because for Pinto is
not on the streets anymore, and
it's because
Lawyers to Ford Motor Company
until they changed the product.
The other example I gave before,
and, and this is really I think
an important part of our
thinking about guns in society
in a, in a more broad sense,
but, um, Senator, you probably
remember 10 years ago, if you
owned an SUV you had to worry
about rollovers, you all
probably remember that for a
period of time, tires would blow
out and we were seeing rollovers
and families being killed,
people being killed.
Commonly in in the news.
You never see that anymore. You
never hear about that anymore.
Why? Because we sued the
manufacturers of tires, and they
began to make better tires. We
sued the manufacturer's vehicles
because we alleged that there
was the technology to make sure
that vehicles don't roll over.
And what? Now the vehicles you
have SUVs don't they have
anti-rollover technology, right?
They have all kinds of braking
systems and technologies to keep
the vehicles from rolling over.
Why did that happen? Because
lawyers sued the.
manufacturer saying you could
manufacture a better product and
they had to acknowledge they
could. Thank you for that.
So there's some parts of this,
uh,
I feel that I do want to go
through, I guess, on, on page 3.
There was a question about
Uh, firearm accessories.
Meaning any device.
Specifically adapted to enable
and on page 4, the wearing or
caring about one's person of a
firearm, storage or mounting in
or on any conveyance of the
firearm.
Any attachment or device
specifically adapted to be
inserted into or fixed into any
firearm. So I guess any of the
things that are related to the
firearm.
I'm assuming this part of this
definition, if any, if anything
related to that firearm was
unfairly, um, advertised, that
could be also
open to
Open to, I guess, um,
Unfair practices. So, uh, what
I'm thinking about in terms of I
may be very simple here. Like I
would say we have a holster.
And they
Firearm accessory and or a
flashlight, you know, a lot of
these
Um
They are type have have
attachments for firearms have
attachments for laser aiming
devices.
And so, let's assume that
They advertise it as new, but
it's used. Say the holster
They advertise it as new, but
it's used. Say the holsterwi
used. Would that be?
An unfair Practice Act could
someone be sued because they
bought a used toaster or a used
flashlight versus a
New
So they're lying about it being
used or new.
And, um, would that be an unfair
or deceptive trade practice.
Senator the answer is no, you'd
have to go to page 6 of the
bill, which defines what is an
unfair or deceptive trade
practices. You're right, the
bill includes a definition of
what is a firearms accessory,
and it's very broad, and I'll
grant you that, um, and it may
be even broader than I think the
law should have, but it's the
definition we used consistently
both in drawing from federal
law. So the definition of how we
define things like a firearm or
are to find here or a
destructive device here or
designed to mirror or
Parallel federal law. And but to
answer your question more
directly, if you go to page 6
line of 17 in subsection L. This
is what a unfair and deceptive
practice means, and we're not
changing that language at all.
So to get to your standard,
what, what is it gonna cost to
an unfair or deceptive trade
practice in connection with the
sale of a holster. Well, you
would have to do something that
um is a uh false, uh, or that
tends to or does in fact deceive
or mislead.
a person and then includes these
numbered paragraphs that we have
for about 3 or 4 pages.
So, as I said, the person
I saw an advertisement said it
was new, but it was actually
used.
That's, that's deceiving the,
the buyer.
Mr. Mr. Chairman and Senator,
uh, that would be an example of
what would be a false and
misleading, you know, deceptive
trade practice. There's no doubt
about it. The question would be
what would be the damage that
occurs as a result of that. So
if you're selling a, a used
holster and calling it new and
somebody buys it, how is that
person injured or harmed by that
purchase, and again, you'd have
a tough time convincing me or
anybody else how, how they're
damaged by doing so.
I understand that. I
I think it's kind of vague in
terms of, of how open this
becomes now if, if, uh,
If we're allowing this kind of
language to go through, I think
it's going to open it up for a
lot of uh
Lawsuits, if you will.
So
I guess I want to get to, we had
one of the uh people speak about
the online issue.
And I think it's important to
maybe explore that a little bit.
Um
I think we're talking about
online marketers being treated
as sellers. In other words,
sometimes.
Like an Amazon. They just offer
up a platform.
And you can buy almost anything
you want on Amazon. We all use
them on a daily basis. I know my
wife gets Amazon products on
that. I think I have more Amazon
boxes.
And then you know human being
cause she's always buying
something on Amazon, but the,
the question I'm asking here is,
It's, it's, it's, it's, it
clearly seems to state that
online marketers could be
treated as sellers, and that if
someone sells on that platform,
a third party.
Yeah
Amazon could be sued. That's a
big market.
I mean that's huge.
And the 250,000 of them, they
could probably afford it.
Um
But what Amazon would end up
doing is saying, OK, where are
the things that are gonna be
sued? I'm gonna take them off my
platform.
There I'm gonna take these
businesses off my platform.
And so this is effectively
shutting down any marketing of
of weapons, weapons systems.
Um
defensive weapons in my case.
Cause that's all I want.
But you're gonna be taking all
of those offline.
Because Amazon says, why should
we bother with that?
We've got a huge market and all
these other things.
So we can take them off. Is that
the intent?
Or do you expect that to occur
as a result of this legislation.
No, I, I'd ask you, Senator, Mr.
Chairman, to think about it this
way.
In my, to my thinking, this is
to treat New Mexico businesses
equal to the online market.
So, for example, if you're an
online, if you're in New Mexico
business and you sell goods or
services here in the state of
New Mexico, you're liable for
the consequences of your
negligence or your faults or
deceptive advertising, no
question about that. Nobody
disputes that.
But if you're an online seller
or you suggesting that that
because you're an online seller
or an Amazon seller, that you're
not subject to New Mexico laws,
and you can't be brought to New
Mexico courts, uh, for justice.
Right now, this bill is intended
to try and address that. I, I, I
would urge you to think about
this. This is leveling our
playing field. This is the way
to protect New Mexico
businesses, uh, because
otherwise, the suggestion is
that if you sell a product
that's defective and injures
somebody, and you're Amazon, you
just say, I'm just um, I'm just
a on online, I think you.
work in an intermediary, right,
they're just a platform to your,
to your way of, of describing
and and I, I, um, in my
experience with some of these
sellers, they're sometimes both,
sometimes they're an
intermediary and just placing
the order with somebody else on
behalf of the online purchaser,
sometimes they're the direct
supplier of the goods, uh,
themselves. So I think Amazon
does some of that themselves as
well too. So the we're in a
whole new world, center, um, and
I think it's time for us as a
state and the law.
To catch up, um, I, I'm like
you, my house is full of boxes,
uh, cardboard boxes and we're,
we're buying more and more
things online.
Are we going to say that when
you do that, when you buy
something online and a product
is shipped to us from somebody
else and they're profiting, uh,
and they're, and, and they
should, I'm big on capitalism.
Why shouldn't they be able to
profit from that, but are we
going to say that that person is
not gonna be subject to New
Mexico laws or to New Mexico
justice? I think that that's
wrong.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
I, I disagree with you because I
think, uh,
I understand you would sue the
person whose responses to
actually show you the, the
device.
Whatever it might be, uh, if I
bought a Black and Decker.
drills from Amazon, my Black and
Decker drills defective. I'm
going to go after black andte.
I'm to go after Amazon because
That was just a pass through,
and they got it to me in 2 days
versus 2 weeks.
So,
Um
You go after the manufacturer or
the or the device that you own.
So if you want to go after the
gun owner, you go after the gun
owner. You want to go, you go
after the person who sold you
there, not the intermediate
platform.
And I think this would set a bad
precedent for
All kinds of things. I think
this would limit, um,
You say it would help protect
the consumer. I'm saying this
would, this would make it very
much harder for consumers to get
access in New Mexico for all
kinds of things because we're
opening the door for all kinds
of litigation or almost any kind
of product, if we start allowing
this kind of behavior.
Uh, that's all I have on this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chairman, I know it's not a
question, but think about this
too, Senator, which is that
that's true, but it also could
mean that Amazon's more careful
about whose product they sell.
Mr. Chair, I think that's, I
agree with you and, and, and I
think that, that's what I see as
the intent of this legislation.
It, it's going to eliminate the
ability to sell firearms to
people who want them.
So, and if that's the intent,
then you may be successful.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Chairman. I, I really don't have
any questions because to me it
seems
pretty clear. This um this is
not a, a gun bill. I, I think I
hear in this committee all the
time that we don't need
Any more laws, and I believe
there are plenty laws that
already exist that address
firearm misuse here.
So I don't think any part of
this bill goes after guns. I
think it frankly goes after
money.
By increasing the liability of
third parties, Amazon, Walmart,
Facebook,
It will not only discourage
those online marketplaces from
making their platforms available
for small business, and mainly
because it's gonna increase
their financial
risk. And so at the end of all
this, online sellers lose.
Online shoppers lose.
But lawyers win.
But again,
lawyers
When again, even tonight, just
tonight we had the uh increase
in workers' compensation bill.
In fact, it seems like at least
there's an average of 1 or 2
every time we meet. We should
just create like an omnibus
lawyer feed bill to package of
how lawyers are going to
continue to get rich, but I will
say I, I, to make it very quick
here, I don't think any part
about this makes New Mexico
safer. I think it just makes
lawyers richer.
Thank you.
Before you take emotions if I
could just conclude on
something, so, um, it, it, it,
I, you all are gonna play back
my video of, of feeding my words
back to me, as you said earlier
in the debate and discussion, I
like that. I'm, I'm, I'm so
yeah, that's right, we're so
good for you. uh, um,
Senator De Senator Brandtley,
um, you know, you, your last
quote cause I wrote it down
carefully, this bill doesn't go
after guns. Um, you just heard a
bunch of people say this bill
goes after guns. Um, so, um,
there's at least a a reasonable
Disagreement about what this
bill is intended to do. He heard
some, I just want to respond to
some of the concerns, some of
the members of the spoken
opposition said they won't be
able to insure themselves. I'm,
I'm, I'm quite confident none of
them have insurance for, uh, the
type of claims that would be
brought here. They probably have
CGL policies, commercial general
liability. Those policies don't
insure for products, typically
products liability. So they
probably, I'm really surprised
if any of the dealers or people
that were gonna be put out of
business in the state have any
insurance for those, those types
of claims.
Anyway, so this wouldn't do
that. Um, and, and, um, I just,
I wanna conclude on, on the
point I made. I really want you
all to understand what I'm
trying to do, Senator Brantley,
you and I've talked about this
before. You and I are gun
owners. I've been a gun owner
since I can remember being uh
having a, a child with a 22 and
a BB gun, um, and
There's responsible gun owners
and there's irresponsible gun
owners.
But there's also something else
going on in our country. We have
gun violence that's
unprecedented in our country.
Unprecedented anywhere on this
planet. We've got to ask
ourselves why and you and I as
gun owners, I hope are part of
the solution to the problem.
Um, I'm a big believer that I'm
looking at Senator Stewart,
Senator Worth, years ago.
Uh, represented Martinez
introduced legislation to
introduce something to combat
DWI. The idea was a
breathalyzer.
You would have thought the world
was gonna end. I'm looking at
center words smile, look at
Senator Stewart smiling when,
when the concept of a
breathalyzer was floated out
there, you would have thought
the world was gonna end. We
can't have this technology, and
yet now we accept that
technology as a way to keep our
streets safer and keep some
people thriving in a safe way.
We, we live in an amazing time
when the technologies just
outstanding, I, I, I wanna learn
to believe that gun
manufacturers can make a gun,
and I, I know the technology
exists, that a gun could
be operated by a certain user,
that technology exists, um,
there, there, there's technology
out there that I think will make
guns safer, and I think
manufacturers will adapt to make
their guns safer if they're
subject to liability and until
they are, I think they will
continue to avoid and resist
like Ford Motor Company did with
the Pinto.
Uh, there's too much money to be
made with without changing their
behavior, their conduct or the
people who uh the manufacturers
of SUVs who wouldn't change
their SUV design or the tire
manufacturers who wouldn't
change theirs. We, we can do, we
can do this, we can make guns
safer, and I think this is the
way to do it.
Senator, I'd move it to pass on
Senate Bill 318.
There's a motion for a due pass,
uh, please call the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Just because I've got this list
over here so.
Representative.
Welcome. I appreciate you
waiting around with us, but by
doing so, you have an idea, a
little bit of how we work over
here, um.
On your bill, we have a
proponent signing list.
It has a number of individuals
I'm trying to, first of all,
know whether these individuals
are part of your presentation
group and within your time
allotment, if they're not,
they'll be given a very brief
amount of time to speak on the
bill, but otherwise, they're
part of your kind of unlimited,
if you will, time for
presentation. So, uh, uh, just
give me kind of a thumbs up or a
nod of the head. Andrew um
Thornton, uh, no, not, uh, Sarah
Crea? No, no Mary Oliver Star.
Evanina,
no, uh, Doctor George Davis, no,
about Marcy Starr, no, nays and
Endicott.
you know. All right, so none of
those individuals are part of
your organized presentation. We
have them in opposition, we have
uh the secretary Tessa Casados,
and so because we want to have a
meaningful discussion. What I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna recognize
the secretary for up to 10
minutes is the only opponent,
but that means that we'll give
you 15 minutes with the
proponents with time for
rebuttal on um the bill and what
we'll do is we'll, I'm sorry,
something.
back in opposition.
support.
OK, yeah, I don't have her
registered. Um, so we'll, we'll,
uh, because there's other
individuals I just listed are
not part of your presentation,
we'll recognize all of them for
just one minute, but you'll have
a full 10 minutes right now,
representatives, uh.
To present your bill and do it
as you wish. All right?
Y a good afternoon Chairman
Cervantes, senators, and Senate
members, staff members as well.
I'm representative Michelle
Abeda from Torjale, New Mexico.
This is my first time appearing
before this committee, and I'm
thankful for the opportunity to
be on today's agenda.
First, I would like to express
my gratitude to Chairman
Cervantes' ranking member
Senator Brantley and Senator
Doigg for carrying versions of
this legislation in prior
sessions. I'm thankful to all of
you for your leadership on this
critically important
legislation.
I asked specifically to be a
part of this legislation with my
co-sponsors, Speaker Martinez,
Majority Leader Skipanzi,
Majority Whip Hockman B. Hill
and minority Leader Armstrong
during this session because this
hits home for me, my children,
my district, and so many New
Mexicans.
Growing up, my parents were not
in a position to take care of me
and my brothers, so we ended up
in kinship care with our
grandmother, and we got lucky.
Grandma Ruth was our biggest
advocate. She was always there
making sure our basic needs were
met, and she occasionally
splurged, treated us out to a
weekend road trip or to eat out.
Because of her, I committed my
life to making sure children
would have an advocate like her,
because it's life transforming
to have someone in your corner
who believes in you.
Fast forward to today, I'm now a
kidship caregiver to two small
boys, Joseph and Michael.
They were placed in my custody
and care 3 years ago at the age
of 2 and 4. My husband, my
husband Chad and I are now their
advocates.
Unfortunately today there are
too many children in our state's
custody.
who do not have anyone in their
corner. And what's happening to
those children?
They're suffering, they're
living in office spaces, they're
not receiving much needed
services. They're being placed
in unsafe homes. They're being
sexually assaulted, raped by
family members, including
siblings.
And dying.
I know this because families and
advocates came to me to share
these stories before I was sworn
into office and after.
In fact, just yesterday I met
with two advocates from Valencia
County.
These stories have strengthened
my commitment to this lifelong
effort.
House Bill 5, Office of the
Child Advocate is a remedy that
can begin to help our children
immediately. House Bill 5 will
create an impartial office
within the Department of Justice
where children, families, and
community members can contact to
share problems and concerns.
This office will provide
assurances that voices will be
heard, issues will be
investigated.
Solutions will be forthcoming.
Ultimately, a final impartial
report will be given to the
legislator that will show the
types of issues being dealt with
and what other support and
assistance we can provide.
Joining me today is Miss
Anjanatamont, Deputy Counsel for
Impact Litigation and Director
for Civil Rights and the honor
speaker Javier Martinez.
Mr. Chair, members.
Thank you for having me. My
name's Angela Saman. I serve as
deputy counsel for impact
litigation with the New Mexico
Department of Justice, where I'm
also Director of Civil Rights.
For the past 20 years, I have
been a civil rights litigator
from the perspective of the
nonprofit advocacy world, as
well as state government
enforcement agencies. Prior to
my current position, I focused
specifically on improving due
process rights, uh, for and the
well-being of children and
families involved in the child
welfare system in different
jurisdictions throughout the
country.
New Mexico faces the unfortunate
reality that for years now,
mechanisms within CYFD have been
insufficient to provide
accountability for or
transparency around the
department's actions.
LFC has noted that the COIFDIG
does not publish a work plan or
a public report.
Meaningful and meaningful
accountability and transparency,
however, is always a challenge
when entities like the IG are
employed within the agency.
CYFD's Office of Children
Children's Rights or Office of
Child Advocacy was also
unstaffed for several years, and
we have no assessment of its
work or even evidence that it
made a positive impact.
CYFD's Office of Constituent
Affairs only looks into
allegations of harassment,
discrimination, or retaliation
by a CYFD employee or into a
grievance brought by parents or
resource parents.
HB 5 is a solution to this
problem. HB 5 would recreate an
independent office of the child
advocate to improve
accountability when the
government takes legal or
physical custody of children and
promote the safety of young
people who are in the state's
care.
The structure of the office and
process for selecting the head
of the office set forth in the
bill are specifically designed
to ensure it is not and the
advocate is not beholden to any
other individual, agency or
department and free to carry out
its mandate without influence or
favor.
The agency would be housed
within the Department of Justice
for administrative purposes as
the bill makes clear, though,
the office would have autonomy
over any decisions it may take.
Second, candidates for the head
of the office would be selected
by a 9-person state child
advocate selection Committee,
whose members are selected by
individuals in the state
legislature, the Governor, the
Attorney General, and New Mexico
Supreme Court Chief Justice. The
committee would forward its
recommendations of qualified
individuals to lead the agents,
uh, the department, uh, to the
governor and the attorney
general. Finally,
most importantly perhaps, HB 5
calls for specialized training
to ensure staff are equipped to
carry out the office's mission
and ensure that staff have no
conflicts of interest with CYFD
or any entity that provides
services pursuant to CYFD
funding.
HB 5 also ensures that the
office is empowered to promote
accountability. Among other
things, it is responsible for
reviewing CYFD services working
with stakeholders, monitoring
the development and
implementation of federal,
state, and local laws, obtaining
testimony in the case of child
fatalities or near fatalities,
deciding whether to investigate
complaints or refer complaints
to the DOJ for investigation or
prosecution maintain contact
with complainants and keep them
informed of their cases.
And in the case where it does
retain a complaint, actually
connecting with any child in the
custody of or receiving
services, um, under the
supervision of CYFD.
Third, I would say as currently
structured, HB 5 creates the
Office of Child Advocate and is
in a way to enhance
transparency.
The office provides reports upon
request, but also annually to
the Legislative Finance
Committee about its work, its
findings with respect to overall
CYFD provision of services,
treatment of conditions and
conditions surrounding children
placed in state care and
findings on the implementation
of ICWA and EFPA.
Finally, the creation of the
Office of the Child Advocate
will mitigate risk mitigate risk
to the state, as well as to harm
to children.
We will make sure that the,
through the bill, we will make
sure that our services are
adequate and responsive to
children's and family's needs.
We will be moving away from a
system where the primary method
for investigation and
accountability of the CYFD is
through expensive and
confidential settlements. And
finally, we will be requiring
the department to provide copies
of all reports related to actual
physical injury or to a child in
custody or at significant risk
of such uh injury in a prompt
manner.
There is minimal, if any, burden
placed on the agency with
respect to data reporting
requirements.
You know, as by way of reference
also, other states have uh OCAs
like this, um, at least, uh,
about 47 states have Office of
Child Advocates or
ombudspersons.
Finally, I would add that the
OCA would operate much like our
uh existing PNA disability
rights PNM uh disability rights
NM. And finally, I'll just close
with saying that we've, the bill
includes provisions to ensure
that there is no conflict with
the Department of Justice's
state obligations.
Thank you. And
Chairman, thank you. We also
request time for rebuttal. All
right. Great. Good. Thank you.
And you've got, it looks like
about um as much as 4 minutes
for that rebuttal opportunity.
Um, there were, as I said, a
number of individuals who
registered to speak in support
um and I'm trying to figure out
of those people that I read,
I'll go through them again who
may be in the room is is Andrew
Thornton in here, you are here,
OK, stand up certain the
microphone, Sara Kreca.
Are you here?
No
And then we have 3 individuals,
4 individuals online.
Oh, yeah, oh, sorry, I'm sorry,
I missed you. Thank you.
Um, and then we go to
individuals online.
And do we have Ellison Endicott,
Quinones, are you here in the
room? OK, so we have a lot
number we go online, right, um,
well, I'll recognize each one of
you for one minute, please.
No, this is Mr. Thornton.
Yeah, you're, you're recognized
for a minute, sir.
Oh, thank you.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, and I especially
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward. I'm
a tax attorney by trade, uh, and
we have a taxpayer advocate with
the IRS to help navigate the.
Uh quagmire, that is the
internal revenue code when uh
the system may be failing
individuals. Uh, when I first
started hearing issues regarding
child welfare, I thought that's
not possible. There's too many
checks, there's too many
balances, but with the situation
that we have here and as many
moving parts as there are,
they're absolutely needs to be
an office of the child advocate
to help navigate the quagmire to
find solutions, uh, report back
to you or what the issues are.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Sarah
Cracker. I am here as an
attorney and advocate for youth
in New Mexico over the last 2,
25 years. I'm also here as a
mother.
I'm here as a deeply concerned
constituent residing in Senator
Doigg's district, where many of
my neighbors are deeply invested
in these issues and want to see
an overhaul of CYFD. I
understand CYFD on a deep level,
and I can tell you that all of
us children's courts judges,
attorneys, longtime foster
parents have never seen the
agency in its current level of
disrepair. It is dramatically
worse than it was 6 years ago.
When this administration took
over, but because of this bill
and others before this
legislature, I am overwhelmed
with hope and optimism today for
children and youth in foster
care for their mothers, for
their fathers, for their
grandparents, aunts and uncles
who fight for them every single
day for the foster parents, for
the families who for years have
felt unheard, unseen, and cast
aside bar by our child welfare
system with no recourse. HB 5 if
pass empower them, not just to
be
heard but to get help and to
receive real advocacy outside of
an agency that currently
operates behind closed doors and
struggles so severely to support
the basic needs of the families
and its care that children's due
process rights are violated
every single day. This spill
will transform the way CYFD does
business, moving from almost
entirely unchecked to
scrutinized. If past families
and children will be heard by
someone who is independent,
impartial, credible.
An external to the agency that
it's harming them and
heartbreaking ways.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Chair.
It start, sorry, you recognized
for one minute.
Hello, my name is Marcy Starr.
My wife and I are IA and IPA
foster parents, and at one time
we were named foster parents of
the year. We've been fostering
for over 10 years. The only
reason to not have a child an
office of the child advocate in
New Mexico is if we no longer
care about children. In
November, I, I asked for respite
for 3 days, and the children in
my care went to another foster
home to give us a much needed
break. The minute they returned
to my home, they wanted
to talk to me. They disclosed
that they were witness to two
different acts of sexual assault
and sexual harassment while in
their respite foster home.
Additionally, during the
daytime, the children were sent
to to the CYFD daycare, or is
the judge referred to it, the
rack.
Where they witnessed physical
assault as well as verbal and
emotional abuse by the adults in
charge of their care. I
immediately made a sky report
and informed their guardian ad
litem. I know the Guardian ad
litem informed the Cabinet
secretary as well as the CYFD
attorney at the time. It is now
March, and this is still not
been investigated. The judge in
the case has imposed sanctions
on CYD and told them at least
twice to investigate this
matter. If there were an office
of the child
advocate, I would have someone
who I could go to to advocate
for the children in my care.
They deserve justice, but even
more, the children in the care
of CYFD deserve to be able to go
into a home or care facility and
not fear they will experience or
witness sexual assault or
harassment, as well as be free
from witnessing physical,
verbal, and emotional abuse.
Please show your desire for
children to be safe and heard by
supporting this bill. Thank you.
Thank.
even sooner.
I zoom
Heaven,
heaven, can you hear me? Yes
sir, you're recognized for a
minute, sir. Hello, my name is
Evanson sorry, I'm dealing with
the flu. Um, I was a former PPW
permy planning worker. I was on
the news February 20th, the KOB
where I said what was going on
at the Albuquerque office. Um, I
support this bill because
frankly, I find it ridiculous
that we're even having this
conversation,
but at least something's coming
of it, I think, sorry, I'm
losing my voice. I think, uh,
This should have happened a
long, a long time ago. And I
also think that the workers at
these offices don't get enough
credit because we were promised
less cases, less hours, uh, less
mandatory overtime, less all
this stuff never came. I was
pushed out of CYFD because I got
really sick. And even though I
had hundreds of hours of leave
built up. Um, I felt like it was
used against me and so I saw a
horrible things working there
and uh
Yeah, I just hope this uh goes
through. That's all I have to
say. Thank you. We have Doctor
George Davis online? No.
Marilyn Beck.
Online?
Oh, no, sorry, I don't know why.
Didn't expect you.
Thank you.
My name is Marilyn Beck and I'm
the founder and executive
director of New Mexico Child
First Network and we dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care, and we
stand strongly in support to
save you all, we echo
everything. I can say that the
more visible I've gotten, I've
become an unofficial ombudsman.
I hear 5 to 7 911 emergencies
almost daily. Um, I wanna just
recognize the secretary in the
room because under her
administration, she has been
very receptive to the phone
calls.
We've received phone calls from
law enforcement district
attorneys, and I received them
directly from hospitals and
career situations. In this past
week alone, I've received calls
that I can help navigate the
system, but I'm an anecdote. I'm
an anecdote and I don't have
confidentiality and I can't
report back to you. It's
Wednesday and in the past 3 days
I have helped a grandfather
trying to navigate the system to
get licensed to foster his
grandson, a foster parent trying
to navigate APS and CYFD on
education and transportation
issues. A foster parent with
Ofra who can't get
an attorney assigned to their
case for the past 6 months, a
bio parent trying to get an
attorney after their attorney
died, a kinship caregiver foster
parent who filed a grievance
with CYFD alleging retaliation,
a pediatric therapeutic provider
helping their client file a
grievance against CYFD who moved
the kid in an emergency 911 and
two foster parents trying to
escalate unanswered questions,
request for respite. I stand in
strong support of this, and we
must, we must pass this. Thank
you.
Hello?
Yes, Miss Keones, you're
recognized for one minute.
Thank you. Uh, good, good
evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Thank
you for uh giving me the
opportunity to speak in favor of
House Bill number 5, creating
the Office of the Child
Advocate. My name is, you know,
is Alison Endicott, Kenyan name
the legal director of Advocacy
Inc, one of the largest
contractors in New Mexico,
providing legal representation
for children in foster care as
attorneys and guardians of
litem. I represented over 750
children over the last 15 years.
Our contract attorneys have
represented thousands of
children since 1986. We are
attorneys who have boots.
the ground seeing the child
welfare system from a
perspective that most New
Mexicans cannot see due to its
secretive nature. Drawing from
our decades of experience,
there's one thing we all agree
upon, CYFD cannot police itself.
Going to see whyFD to complain
about CYFD misconduct is
tantamount to asking a child
abuser to investigate itself for
abuse. We have seen CYFD's
attempts at self-regulation,
each of which has ended in
failure. CYFD is not held
accountable for its failure to
protect children, meet their
needs, or assist their families.
Those who attempt to call out
the injustices inflicted by CYP.
these actions or inactions
regarding the safety and needs
of the children are silenced,
retaliated against, or shut out
from all information. My
clients, children, expressed
fear that the department will
retaliate against them if they
speak out with concerns for
their own safety. They fear
being removed from their
placements, foster homes,
schools, and families if they
raise concerns. Many foster
parents have been threatened
with removal of children from
their home, if they call
attention the department failing
to do its job. Even attorneys
for the children experience
this. It is not uncommon for
those of us who raise red flags
due to the safety concerns for.
clients to be shut out by CYFD.
It becomes nearly impossible to
access information that the
department is required to
provide by law. Phone calls
stopped being returned. We
aren't invited to meetings
anymore and are told not even
told about them. Complaints get
filed against children's
attorneys when they push too
hard. Thank you, Ms. Quinones.
That completes those who
register to speak.
And support and you've reserved
some time, so we'll come back to
you at the end. Um, given the
amount of time that we've
allowed for proponents of the
bill will go to opponents, the
only person to have is Secretary
Cassos, a secretary, given the
um time that we allowed for the
proponents, I allow you the same
time if you need it, so you'll
have up to 10 minutes if you
wish.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Teresa Casados with
Children, Youth and Families
Department. I absolutely
appreciate the 10 minutes that
you're affording me, but in
every other committee they've
given me one minute and so I've
written some really quick
talking points and um I can
gladly talk for 10 minutes, but
I think I just really wanna come
up here and say CYFD is not
opposed to the oversight or the
advocacy or the work that's
included in this bill. We
absolutely agree with all of
that. We actually submit.
a bill through the governor's
office, Senate Bill 363 that
does just about everything
that's included in this bill.
With the exception of making it
punitive. I truly believe that
doing this advocacy work and
doing it through our Department
of Justice, that in and of
itself sounds punitive. I think
it's scary for employees that
are doing the work every day.
I'm not saying that things are
perfect. I think there's been a
lot of points that have been
brought up tonight, where we do
need to continue to do that work
and foster parents and kids and
employees and everybody else.
needs an avenue to be able to go
to get that advocacy work done,
but there are other options. It
doesn't have to necessarily be
At an agency that
is an elected official. These
elected officials have very
specific requirements of what
they are stand to do under
legislation and policing another
department is not one of their
requirements. There are areas
where we have in state
government currently when we
proposed this, it was at the
regulation and licensing
department who also has the
substitute care advisory
council, which is federally
mandated to do work.
And oversight with CYFD.
They are housed at regulation
and licensing and feel that you
could put the two together to
continue to do that oversight
work. If that's not an option,
there's another viable option in
establishing that same authority
that we had requested through
Senate Bill 363 at the New
Mexico Developmental
Disabilities Council. They do
advocacy work. It's what they're
set up to do. They have a board.
They have an executive director
that is appointed by that board
and can be removed only by that.
They're a separate entity. They
also have the ombuds program
that this legislative body
approved two years ago to do
Amba's work for the public
schools and for families who did
not feel that they were getting
what they needed from the school
system. They already have people
in place that can do this work.
So I think there are other
opportunities for us to get the
same result that we're all
looking for. We all want a
better child welfare system for
our kids. We all want a place
where people can go to feel hurt
and
to get results, and I think if
we do this in a way that is non
punitive and gives them that
same opportunity.
We can get the results that
we're all looking for. So I just
wanted to provide those other
options and say that I'm not
here to stand in opposition of
the contents of this bill, more
so just where we have it
residing. So thank you very much
for your time and consideration.
Thank you, and um, you have some
additional time, but it doesn't
look like you're gonna use it
and I, I don't want to
discourage you otherwise. I, I
appreciate the fact that you may
have had a limited amount of
time in other committees, we
operate things differently here.
We want to make sure that you
have the full opportunity
because you want to have a
thorough discussion, but that
completes the opposition, so
that takes us then to members of
the committee.
Better do it.
Man, the way you say that, Mr.
Chair, Chairman, can we have
just a couple of minutes to
rebuttal if we may,
we can do that now, sure, you,
you have that done. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. First of all,
thank you for the time. I know
how busy this committee is and,
and um I'm deeply, deeply
grateful for the opportunity to
be here tonight and to all of
you who have worked on these
issues for many years. I know
it's, this is a long time
coming. Um.
I just want to clarify a couple
of points. This is not about
being punitive, unless you're
doing something wrong, right?
And in that case, we have to
hold agencies and we have to
hold those actors accountable.
Um, I don't see anything wrong
with an elected official.
Being the one who is in charge.
Um, at some level of, uh, of, of
ensuring that transparency and
ensuring that the work is being
done in the way that it should
be, uh, after all.
You know, the executive, the
governor in this case is an
elected official, and that is a
person who appoints the
secretary of the CYFD.
Um
This is not about policing, but
policing, uh, the hardworking
men and women of this
department. It's about shining
light.
On an agency that has been
broken for a long time.
Long before this governor.
came into office.
Uh, this is also about
consistency. The children of New
Mexico, Mr. Chairman was in the
committee, uh, deserve better.
Um, and I think that that
Consistent, you know, that that
consistency uh can bring light
and can bring hope to children
and families who have long
struggled with an agency that
quite frankly, I think, is a
little bit over its head.
Um, and we've all seen and heard
and read about the horror
stories. Uh, those are the ones
that come to light, and usually
when it's too late.
Uh, we want to make sure that
Children, families.
Biological families, foster
families, have the ability to go
to an agency that is independent
of the department.
to express
their discontent to express
their concerns and many times
expressed their, um, uh, you
know, their claims of harm, um,
as, as, as it relates to the
well-being of children.
Uh
I hear and understand the
concern over
An independent agency having
oversight.
Well what I hear and see more.
is the plight of children in
this state.
I'm not a child who will be an
expert.
But I will tell you.
As Speaker of the House.
I've heard from my chamber, and
I can tell you.
I've heard from every single
member of the house.
That's why this bill passed
unanimously out of our chamber
just a few days ago.
We are ready
And willing
Lead
I know the Senate is as well
because as I said at the
beginning of this rebuttal.
Many of you have been working on
this, Senator Brantley, and you,
you've worked on this for a long
time. I think since your first
day in office, you have, so
We hope that you can vet this
piece of legislation in the way
that only this committee knows
how to.
And we hope to move this piece
of legislation forward on behalf
of New Mexico's children. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. We'll go to members of
the committee now, but before I,
I have you, I don't know how
much time we'll keep you here,
Mr. Speaker, but I, I'll just
let you know that
I appreciate that we're an honor
to have you here. One of the
challenges that, that, that um I
encountered the last several
years I've chaired this
committee and once we get to
this stage of the session is the
thinking that we cannot amend
House bills over here because of
the time that they have to go
back to the house in the time
they'll spend through your
committee process and your floor
debate discussion. Um, so with,
with the opportunity of having
you here, I I hope that we can
count on you to allow us to
amend house bills in this
chamber and to work with those.
s back, if they come back to
your chamber and they're
accepted by our by our chamber,
um, and, and I bring that to
your attention. I want to let
you know I brought that
attention to the uh Senate
minority leader as well too,
because I'll be really straight
with all of you here that when
we get to a place where I'm told
as a chair, you cannot amend a
House bill because it will go
back for hours of debate and
shut things down. Then I adopt a
uh an attitude that the only
bills I will hear and schedule
for the committee are those that
are perfect.
Only the bills that require no
amendment and no uh work on this
committee will, will get
scheduled and that's not the way
this should work either. So we
need a commitment from the House
members and, and the minority as
well too, because I've, I've let
the minority know that if, if
you're minority bills are coming
over here and we have several of
them, if they're not perfect,
they're not going to get hurt
either, uh, for the same reasons
that they're gonna go back to
the house and have the minority
taking the time and, and, and
bringing that delay. So I, I, I
preface that.
to suggest to you, Mister
Speaker, sponsors, and everyone
on the committee, we may be
amending custom house bills from
time to time, and I will do so
already and I, I'm hoping that
we don't get to the place where
I have to say, this is not, this
is not a perfect bill and we're,
we're done here in the Senate
Judiciary, so I hope, I hope you
take that, Mr. Speaker, with all
the respect that I, I want to
give you in your chamber. So
Senator do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Chair, I think all but
two of the members of this
committee, uh, are signed on as
sponsors to the Senate version
of this bill, uh, which is very,
very similar to, to what we're,
we're looking at tonight, um.
So I'm hoping there is a, a high
degree of comfort with what's
happening and in house Bill 5,
based on um the commitments that
were indicated on, on, uh,
Senate Bill 307.
I have 2 amendments. I'm, and I
want to do them one at a time.
The first one is, uh,
853.3.
If we can get that one,
passed out.
And
Much of, uh,
Much of what what we're doing in
these amendments is not
substantive, and they are not
substantive changes, they are.
They tweaks.
And uh
And the small changes that uh
make this conform to some of
the, the standards in in this
committee, um,
And I, I had given both this
amendment and, uh, the other one
that we'll be looking at to to
Miss Dudley, so I hope sponsors,
you saw that, saw those as well,
and this is not coming as a, a
total shock to you.
Mr. Speaker, how long have we
got you? Are you here for the
duration?
Mr. Chair of our House Judiciary
Committee is meeting right now
as well, so, you know, as soon
as we get a text, I'll probably
have to run out, but I'll be
here as long as I need to be.
OK, good. It, it'll help I think
the communication between the
chambers, so Senator Dede, go
ahead and, and that being the
case, Mr. Chair, the, the 2nd
Amendment is, is a more
substantive one. What it would
do would be to put the
substitute care advisory council
within the office of the Child
Advocate. Um, and so.
Mr. Speaker, if you would prefer
that we do that one first, since
that one is more substantive.
I'm happy to do that.
You have this.
Do you have a preference?
If
So
and um
Senator Doig, I have also not
seen the longer version.
I've only seen this one here.
OK, let's go ahead and and pass
out that other one. let's start
with that one since all we've
got the speaker here.
And Mr. Chair, I might call for
an assist from Senator Trujillo
on this one as well. Um, what
this, and this is the, the
amendment that ends in 15.1.
So currently, the, the
substitute care advisory
council.
Uh, and this is, um,
And in fact
Senator, why don't you come on
up.
I'm gonna let Senator Trujillo
explain this one because this
is, we're working together on
these, uh, and this part really,
really was hers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. So currently the
substitute care advisory
council, and I'll say, I
couldn't agree more with the
secretary that the substitute
care advisory council is
Should in fact be with the,
with, with the House Bill 5
functions.
It has been over, it was
originally a DFA.
And DFA was contracting with an
MSU and uh they were working um
to do exactly what and I'll read
a little bit about what they do.
And then under the Martinez
administration in 2016, they
were plucked out of DFA and they
were put over at regulation and
licensing department.
Once you hear what their
responsibilities are, I think
you'll agree with me that that
is not where they should be.
Regulation and licensing
department oversees a lot of
things, but child advocacy is
not one of those things. So the
substitute care advisory council
is responsible for a federal
program that implements what's
called citizen review panels.
These are volunteer groups that
review and evaluate the child
protective policies, procedures
and practices of state and.
local agencies aiming to improve
the child wel welfare system.
CRPs were established under the
Federal Child Abuse Prevention
and Treatment Act, CAPTA, to
ensure that states are
effectively carrying out their
child protective
responsibilities.
CRPs are made up of volunteers
who represent the community and
may include individuals with
expertise in child abuse
prevention and treatment, as
well as adults who are victims
of child abuse or neglect.
Their responsibilities are to
examine policies, procedures and
practices of child protective
agencies.
Review specific cases where
appropriate.
Provide provide feedback to the
affected on the effectiveness of
agency child abuse prevention
and treatment strategies
identify strategies for child
welfare system improvements,
reviews state and local CPS
agent child Protective Service
agencies.
Um, and make sure that they're
in compliance with the state's
CAA plan. Their responsible to
maintain confidentiality and
produce an annual summary of
their activities and conduct
public outreach and comment.
They also get federal funding
for the work that they do.
So, the plan, the state plan,
their responsible for
implementing that, and then in
turn, they draw down money.
And, and Mr. Chair, so what this
does is it puts it puts that
council within the, the office
of, of the child advocate rather
than at RLD.
It also
For the purpose right now, um,
Secretaries can send designees,
uh, as members, so this would
this would take away that
designee option so that they
have the secretaries themselves,
uh, attending these meetings.
Um
Trujillo. I know this one better
than I do. Yeah, that's fine.
Um, so the substitute care
advisory council was made up
currently of
10 individuals.
No, I'm sorry.
9 individuals. We're changing it
to 11 members to include.
And these are the, these are the
individuals that are already on
there. The Secretary of Public
Education, the Secretary of used
to be Human Services and it
would be changed to healthcare
authority. The child state child
advocate, which is House Bill 5.
The Attorney General, which is a
new edition because they would
be housed over the Attorney
General.
The Secretary of Health.
And then the secretary of early
childhood education and care,
which would be a new member, one
children's court judge appointed
by the governor and 4 public
members appointed by the
governor, so it would be a, it
would be a 11 members, 9 of
which still are directly
reporting, well, not directly
reporting. The secretaries
directly report to the governor,
but the other individuals are
appointed by the government.
But they would be under the
direct authority and
responsibility of the child
advocate, and they would be
housed outside of the executive,
so that they could do the work
that they're intended to do.
Without oversight of the
executive.
Um, I usually we all go to the
sponsors, sponsors. Have you had
enough time to digest the
proposed amendment in front of
us.
So Mr. Chair members of the
committee, um, the short answer
is though and all, all defer to
my co-sponsor.
Um
The short answer is no and um
You know, this bill's been here
for a few days, so it would have
been.
Better, I think, from the
sponsors of the event to have
had this, at least with a few
hours.
For us to be able to digest and
fully um
More fully understand at this
point, the short answer is no,
we have not had enough time, and
we consider this amendment
unfriendly.
All right, committee members on
the proposed amendment.
Mr. Chair, I'll, I'll just say,
I, we got it delivered while
we're sitting here. I apologize.
Had I had it earlier, we
definitely would have gotten it
to you earlier, as soon as it
was walked in here, I went
handed Miss Dudley a copy of it.
Uh, doing, you had it, and then
Senator Stewart, did you have a
question today? I understand you
have a question.
Uh, well, Mr. Chairman,
You know, let, let's give the
house the time they need.
You know, I, I think we all want
this bill and we all want to get
it right.
You know, let, let's, let's roll
it over and give them the time
they need and schedule it first
the next time.
I mean, I don't wanna, we, I
don't wanna fight with the other
chamber, you know, we wanna get
this right, and if it's not
right, then let's give them time
to digest these two amendments.
My suggestion, but who cares?
Senator Stewart we'll hear from
other members of the committee,
and we'll make some decisions
here in a little bit. Senator,
so it just feels to me like this
is a whole, this is an important
discussion that needs to happen,
but it just feels to me like
this is happening way too fast
in the sense that I don't even
Understand what this does, how
it integrates, kind of feels to
me like we need to, I mean, this
House Bill 5 is Senator Brant
and I were looking at the Senate
Judiciary Committee subsuit for
the bill 2 years ago that passed
the Senate with 8 votes in
opposition, very similar to
what's in this bill. This to me
feels like a discussion that
needs to happen, but I don't
know that it needs to happen
right at this moment. It's going
to take time for this to stand
up.
And it just feels, uh, there's
all kinds of questions about how
this interplays with this office
things that I don't, we could
delay for two days, but
Uh, I just, my feeling is that
we have, again, I'm, I'm curious
to hear the other more, you
know, clean up, but this to me
feels like it's something that's
kind of brand new and how it
intersects.
With this office are a lot of
different questions and do we
need to do this right at this
moment.
I mean, I get, it sounds like it
needs to happen.
But I, to me, this is a whole, I
mean, all these new members, I
mean, this is a, a bill that
would go through rules so that
we could figure out who gets
what appointments and all that
stuff and just trying to do it
on the fly, you know, with
11 days left.
To me feels like something that
we should wait past this bill,
and then come back and let's
look at this in the interim, and
let's get it right, because it
makes sense to me that it should
be there. I'm not saying that
in, in at all. It just feels
like we do this one step at a
time, so that'd be my take.
All right, so hold on, dude. So
anyone else?
All right. Well, that's done.
So, yes, so Mr. Chair, I'll,
I'll withdraw the amendment.
1
Yes.
Very good, good one.
The other men
All right. So going back to the
one ending in 53.3.
I'm just gonna, I'm gonna walk
through.
And, and Mr. Chair, before I
walk through this amendment, I
just want to say, uh,
We heard a comment from, from
Miss Crea saying that uh, that
things are getting worse. And
I'll, I'll say that, um, I've
heard that from multiple terms.
Who will work in this area.
Um, the things seem to be
getting worse rather than
better. Um, and I think that the
secretary has the hardest job in
state government. And so I, I am
really hopeful that this Office
of the Child Advocate.
Well
Won't be, won't be punitive,
but, but we'll, we'll help.
The secretary do the hardest job
in state government.
But looking at this, uh,
amendment. So,
The first thing this does is
that it strikes an amendment
that was made in the House
Judiciary, but we're gonna put
But most of that amendment back
in. Uh, if you look on page 3.
It's the language that this
would be putting in, uh, is that
the, the advocate is appointed
by the governor with the consent
and advice of the Senate. So
that the advocate would come
before the Senate for
confirmation, uh, just as we do
with other important positions
in this state. Um, and then it
puts back in most of what that
house of Amendment did, which
was to strike, uh, language, uh,
about the initial.
um
And when it would begin and end.
On page 4.
Right now, the, the member who
would be selected by the
governor, they're required to
both have specialized expertise
and and if
Right now, the, the member who
would be selected by the
governor, they're required to
both have specialized expertise
and and it and and and uh Equa.
And also have lived experience
in the foster care juvenile
justice system. I think that was
probably a very narrow.
Category of person. Um, so I'm
changing that and to an or.
On page 5, right now, the, the
committee when they picked the
names, they would submit them to
the governor and the attorney
General, since the governor is
the one appointing. I don't
think it makes sense that
they're submitting names to the
Attorney General, so I'm just
taking that reference to the
Attorney General out there.
On page 7.
Lines 18 through 20. So this,
this whole section that we're
looking at here is a chef
section, but the language in
that subsection 6 is Mahi
language. It is saying that the
advocate shall decide in its
discretion.
Whether to investigate a
complaint or refer it to another
agency. I don't, I don't think
ma language should be in a shall
section and, and we're gonna see
some of that language reinserted
later in the May part.
Um
And, and I'll say, I don't think
we need to say in law.
I don't think that they would
decide whether to investigate a
complaint or not, if, if the
advocate found that something to
be meritless and did not warrant
investigation.
I mean, we don't, we don't say
for anyone else who investigates
things. We don't specifically
say in law, they will decide
whether they investigate or not,
so it's taking that language
out.
Sure.
Um, you've got several pages of
amendments here and each of them
seems to be discrete and
distinct, uh, where they, where
they're gonna see a lot of
repeats pretty soon here, Mr.
Ca. right, so why don't you,
first of all orient us if you
would please to what, what is
the
What is the purpose served by
your amendment? In other words,
what I, what I'm hearing right
now is the bill as it exists
gives certain authorities
outside the executive branch or
I guess outside the governor's
part of the executive branch to
the general, and you're
fundamentally
Reversing that, is that right?
No, Mr. Chair, I do not. The
only thing that's striking that
reference to the Attorney
general is, is that, that's just
who the committee gives the
names to of who they are
nominated as the advocate since
the governor is the one who
makes that appointment, not the
attorney general. It didn't make
sense to me that those names
would go to the Attorney
general. What what is striking
the House Judiciary Committee
Amendment number 1 accomplished.
So all that then was on page 3.
That struck.
Like what is the the same
amendment is, is, is that
it just put it back in the
language for me to say that the
appointment by the governor
would be within ad advice and
consent of the Senate, and then
I reststruck the same language
that that
House of trying to accomplish
sinners instead of us going
through the bill line by line,
page by page, which is gonna
take some time, it's gonna take
some work and in fairness to the
sponsors some of their time. I
don't know whether they've had
it or not yet, but what I'd like
to do is I'd like to get some
sense from the committee, first
of all.
Whether what you're proposing to
change conceptually, as the
majority support of the
committee before we go through
the exercise of trying to figure
out exactly how to do that by
making some sense there. You are
Mr. Chair, but there are
different things done by
different parts of it that I
without explaining those, I
don't know how the committee
would know.
If they agree with it or not. I,
I don't, I don't have a, a, a, a
uh 3 set up for you. Well, the
difficulty with the approach
we're taking is because the
amendments you're proposing, you
have kind of disinct to industry
purposes or objectives.
I, I'm trying to figure out
whether we're going to vote on
this commitment in total one
time and adopt everything you're
proposing for uh attaching or
essentially consider each other
discrete changes right because
as you went through the
presentation, you're describing
one of these changes that I
think we're gonna be left with
the choice of up or down with
the whole thing, the way we're
going at it. It's gonna be.
pretty hard to do it otherwise,
some of them are related. So, so
for example, throughout this it
will describe the people who
uh, the advocate will have an
obligation to give information
to. Uh, there's various, uh,
categories of people described.
One of those categories in
multiple places are, it's um,
Where is it? It's like any
child.
Subject to
Subject to a referral to the
department. That is could
literally be every child in New
Mexico.
Every child in Mexico could be
subject to a referral. So let's
take that language out of, of
each placerupt you one more
time, so with the sponsors, if
you all had a chance to consider
this proposal and 853.3.
The time you consider adequate
or necessary.
Thank you, Chairman. No, we have
not. We've only had a few
minutes to review it as a team.
I think it would be valuable for
me to explain the reasoning
behind it, and then if you wanna
roll it, uh, and come back.
And that's one thing, but I, I
think, I think it would.
I think it would be important
for the sponsors to understand.
The reasons behind what we have
here.
I appreciate that. I'm also
appreciative of Senator
Stewart's suggestion earlier
that um that we want to let the
sponsors, you know, the from the
house at the time they think
they need to understand they're
getting this only minutes from
now, and we're gonna roll it
over.
Um, the question is, what, what
point do we do so, do we do so
now or after we've spent an hour
or more going through this, um
it's not gonna take an hour to
go through this. So this is just
like
hold one second, I'm gonna
recognize centeror again.
So, I mean, I think.
I think we should just spend the
time to go through the general
framework of this.
see if it's doable. I mean,
again.
At this point.
Given where we are, I mean, it's
realize it's 459 and we're at
that.
On stage.
We heard that you walked past
the bill that said lobbyist.
So.
So, so we have houses, there's
no food.
to
You suggesting this. So it seems
to me first of all on page 3,
there's a big one that the last.
The last 3 pages, 34, and 5 are
basically 1, maybe the best
thing to start with section 18,
that's adding one line to an
issue that knocks that off.
Um
And again, I mean, I, I'm
hearing some things and the way
this was, it does make, makes
perfect sense to me. I don't see
why the names would go to the
Attorney general. I, I, we spent
time the other night talking a
lot about agencies that are
administratively attached, and I
learned something from Senator
Maestas on what he's been
dealing with on that other law
enforcement academy and, you
know, the language that's in
here about autonomy and this
being totally separate from
that. So it does seem strange
that you would have that.
kind of thing happens, so
I mean, if these aren't
substantive changes, then it's
better to get it right, see if
we can get.
Feels to me.
But I leave it to the will of
the.
You know, the committee,
obviously.
Too, and I think in fairness to
them, they, they do deserve the
time, but uh what we'll do is,
uh, Senator do is I'll recognize
you for 10 more minutes, uh, to
get through these amendments and
then we'll see where that leaves
us and at that time, we um, if
it looks like we've made some
progress. I do want to, I do
want to allow for tonight, even
if we're gonna roll over the
bill. I do want to allow for
tonight for the members to
discuss where we're at with CYFD
in a global sense, if you will,
right? And we haven't had that
opportunity yet. We immediately
came in here and got into the
weeds, and I'd like to get us
Out of the weeds, uh, tonight
and, and really get a chance to
have the committee express the
input to the sponsors and to the
secretary here in the advocates
and others on on where we're at
with CYF indeed at the 30,000 ft
level before we start, like I
said again.
digging through the mud.
Mr. Chairman, I will say in the
time that we've talked about how
long we're going to talk about
the amendment. I have
Kind of skimmed through a lot of
this, and I will tell you that
the intent, this still leaves
the intent of the bill very much
intact. So I would, I would
agree that these are pretty
reasonable cleanup amendments.
But I'll listen to you.
10 minutes I, I, I appreciate
that. Ultimately, I've got to
look to the sponsors and if they
say they haven't had a chance to
look at this, that, that matters
to me. So Senator do it.
OK, well, I think we had
where we left off was on page,
going on to page 8.
Uh, so this amendment number 6.
Would say so right now it says
the complainant gets updated,
uh, within 30 days. This also
says that both the complainant
and the subject of the
complaint, uh, get notified of
the final outcome within 90 days
of completion of the
investigation.
There's some language in that
subsection 9 on page 8 that that
I just don't think needs to be
in law, say working in
collaboration with relevant
parties. I don't think that
needs to be a mark. Um,
There as language online's 10
online 10 that says support
children and families by, again,
I don't think that needs to be
in law. We, we're, we are laying
out what the, the requirements
are. We don't need to qualify
them.
I'm on page, so on page 8 line
13, taking out upon request, so
that there's a requirement to
provide this comprehensive
information, uh, to the governor
of state agencies and
legislators, regardless of
whether a specific request is
made.
Uh, uh, on the, on
The other stuff on page 8 is
really is just cleaning up
language, making it clear that
the information and records that
can be accessed are the same
that the department would have,
uh, the CYFD would have, uh, be
a titled to access so that we're
not say like.
potentially violating HIPAA and
stuff.
Uh, we would also be putting in
a subsection, um, again,
clarifying just that.
That the length that the
information that can be accessed
is whatever the department
accesses and just making that
language a little more clear.
On page 9.
We would be, um, so under May,
it is saying adopt and
promulgate rules, that's already
been it, that was already under
show. So we don't need that
again under May. We don't need
the language that says
says, uh, that they can hire and
contract without regard to party
affiliations only on the grounds
of competence and fitness to
perform, and that is, that
should be true whether we say it
in law or not.
On page 10.
It's
Just really just clean up, uh,
page 10 is where we start seeing
this language about subject to
the referral of the children who
are subject to a referral to the
department that is literally
every child in New Mexico. We
want to make sure that it is
clear what the obligations are,
um,
And there's also adding back in
language we had taken out under
shell that was May language, uh,
that they can refer and uh case
to for investigation to another
agency.
Let's see, uh, on page 10, also
we're inserting a subsection, so
that of the of the data that
we're getting, we're also
finding out how many children
who have been removed from their
homes, and then returned, and
then subsequently removed again.
That happens repeatedly. That
was not one of the data points
that was in here. I think that's
important for us to know.
On page 13.
Which is talking about conflicts
of interest, right now, there
would be a conflict of interest,
uh, if the person has a direct
ownership and a provider
facility, um, I think it should
just be an ownership interest
period.
Uh, uh, again, on page 14, we're
taking out that subject to a
referral to a referral by the
department language.
And making clear that
That it's uh, that it does apply
to someone who is parent
guardian or custodian is under
investigation by the department.
Uh, on page 15,
There was notwithstanding
language, we hate
notwithstanding language, so it
is just changing how it's you
still basically, the effect is
notwithstanding. This is about
confidentiality. This is saying,
except as provided for in
subsection B, confidentiality,
blah blah blah. But then,
subsection B talks about when
that information can be
released. It's just not making
sure that we're not using
notwithstanding, because that is
not favored in this committee.
On page 16, again, it's just
striking that subject to refer
all of the department language.
On page 17, right now, this is
talking about the AG bringing a
civil cause of action, um,
against the department, and it
also specifically says or a
department employee, uh, I think
it is hard enough to get people
to work at CYFD right now. Um, I
don't think we need to have
individual, uh, actions against
individual employees in this
context. So, it's taking out or
department employee.
And then otherwise,
All it's doing is this bill
created an IPRA exception within
the bill.
The chair
Doesn't like it for exceptions
that aren't in IPRA, but it is
also repeating that IPA
exception in IPRA.
And that is what this amendment
does.
Mr. Chair.
Thank
Thank you very much, Senator
Dear uh sponsor, take your time,
your thoughts.
Thank you, Chairman Maestas and
thank you, Senator Du for
bringing these amendments to our
attention. Uh, we understand
that it's also important to you
to make sure that this is in its
best condition moving forward to
immediately help our children.
Uh, we understand the amendments
and
We're willing to work with you
to make sure that this can get
passed out of committee today.
Thank you.
So Mr. Chair, so and so sponsor
does, does that mean you, you
don't want it rolled.
To consider this amendment.
Vice chairman may assist and
Senator, yes, that's correct, we
do not want it rolled.
OK, in that case, I move the
amendment.
Thank you. So we're on the
amendment, I think, uh,
I think it's just keep in mind,
um,
In my
of a beta, and of course
grateful the speaker was here.
It's um
It seems
Like time is short, but it's
not. It's not. It's, it's
Wednesday, um, we have, we, we
meet normally on Monday,
Wednesday, Friday, so we'll be
meeting Friday and Monday. We
definitely wanna
assuming everybody wants to get
it passed, we want to get it
passed.
for concurrence and and back on
the gov's desk by Monday or
Tuesday.
Um, so there is a crunch time,
no question about it, but I
think if we were to pass this on
Friday, I think it'll still be
good.
But nonetheless, uh, having said
that, there's a, there's a, yes
I do have
May I ask a follow-up question?
Sure. Well, let me finish my
comments, yes, uh, they, I, but
I do think, you know, there's a,
there's a, there's a motion on
the table.
Procedure Lisa will be
addressing the proposed
amendment which is 853.3.
Uh, we're, we're on the
amendment, Representative Bota.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I think this is
an unfriendly amendment, and I
would leave it up to the will of
the committee.
So
We stepped out of the room for
just a minute, so you have the
floor, there myit, right? um.
We, we asked Mr. Chairman for a
response. It's unfriendly. It
was also expressed by the
sponsor not to roll it over but
to pass it out tonight, and I
suggested, even if we passed it
out on Friday, we still have
time to get it.
the other desk.
Within 3 days.
Your amendment, is there
something you want to close
with?
Mr. Chair, this does not make
any substantive changes, uh, the
bulk of the amendment is just
restating the IPRA exceptions
because you like IPRA exceptions
to be an emperor itself, but
there's no substantive changes
in this amendment. This is just
making it conform to the
conventions of this committee,
uh, the most substantive thing
that it does is it gives the
Senate uh the ability to confirm
the advocate.
Right.
Yes. Thank you. Uh, before you
came back in, I asked the vice
chair my justice if I could ask
one more question about the
amendment that I was not able to
ask.
One more, yes, because we had
just moved into what was next,
and I did not get to finish my
questions. Go ahead. What's your
question. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Deit, um, my one
question about the amendments is
if you could ask me how the
amendments were developed and
what led to proposing these
amendments. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, uh, Senator from
my discussions with leadership.
That was
Asked to look through the bill.
Make any suggestions that, that
needed for, for clean up, uh,
for it to make it conform to, to
the conventions of the
committee, uh, so I just sat
down on the floor and looked
through it, and, and looked at
307, um, and there's some stuff
in here that's not in 307 that
that I have left because, cause
it should be in here.
Um, but really it was just me
going through the bill, uh,
thinking.
What do we usually do in Senate
Judiciary.
That's it.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Senator Dole. I appreciate
the response.
Thank you. All right.
We on the proposed amendment,
that stood by a roll call.
Oh, I thought we, that's what
we, you're right, we haven't had
much discussion commitment, so
go ahead and set my right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative Abeta, Mr.
Speaker, Represent Martinez,
they do it, but I'm just
curious, did you, was this
expressed in any way?
to the sponsors that that this
amendment was coming down the
pipe.
So you see at the same time.
We all saw it. Mr. Chair, it got
delivered here while we were
sitting here in committee, and I
gave a copy to Miss Dudley.
Once I got it. I, I, I sat and
did this yesterday on the floor.
Uh
After I was told that this bill
was gonna be her. Thank, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Senator. No,
I'm, I'm asking, I'm not asking
the amendment itself. I'm
talking about the intent to
propose an amendment.
best
Mr. Chair, I don't, I don't have
a, a different answer. Oh, I'm
sorry, let me ask you a
different question, Mr.
Chairman. Senator, was the
sponsor was given a heads up
that you were going to propose
an amendment.
Prior to the hearing,
not by me, uh, I, that's.
I think they're
Multiple people on this
committee who
knew that we were doing an
amendment, uh, but I wasn't
involved in, in this in any
conversations with the house.
No, thank you for that. The, um,
cause I'm
So, no, we all appreciate the
work you've done on this bill.
I'm just trying to wrap my arms
around all the
Around all of this, and I think
A lot of it's technical, but a
lot of it's um
Kind of by choice, um.
If this
Um
But I don't really have any
comments on the amendment itself
because I can go line by line,
but it's um.
I think the vast majority of
these are probably appropriate.
If this bill does uh remains on
the table for another couple of
days, it'd be great to
Figure out which specific lines
are friendly, which specific
lines are not, we could do an
amendment that's friendly boom
and then we could discuss and
debate those that are not true.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Anyone, Senator O'Malley, Mr.
Chair, this is getting a little
confusing and um I'm concerned
about.
Not just uh not the specifics
about the amendment, but uh
You know, the, the concern about
uh the bill itself and moving it
forward and having enough time
to move it forward, and those
kinds of things and I just
wanted to, so let's just to
confirm, this amendment you
consider it unfriendly.
That is correct, Mr. Jones and
send.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I
I'm looking at these changes and
I think Senator Duheg did a
reasonable job to just clean it
up is what I'm seeing.
I personally don't have any
problems with it, but I do
understand something new coming
before them.
And I do know that we we're
under a time crunch here. I, I,
yeah, I don't know what the
formal procedure is to.
to approve this and still get
this incorporated, but if
there's some way to allow them
to do this and still approve it.
I'm not quite sure if there's a
way to do this procedurally.
So, it sounds like there may be
some things they would agree
with. There may be just a one or
two things they disagree with.
And yet, they need to get this
moving.
Um
If there is a way to, to help
that happen, I think that would
be good, but
I'm not sure what the procedure
is to make that, yeah.
Mr. Chair. Senators. So another
option, given that they haven't
Really had a huge chance to look
at this and that it is just kind
of a technical cleanup. If we
don't put this on tonight.
Uh, pass the bill out.
Give him a chance to look at it.
We can put together a floor
amendment that I don't think
it's gonna be a problem for the
parts that are agreeable, and we
put that floor amendment on, on
our side, and that's just
another way to do it, that gives
them a it allows the process to
move forward, but also, I mean,
I hear what Senator Do is
saying, the advice and consent
of the Senate's a no-brainer to
me. That has to be in here. So
we're going to do an amendment.
This isn't about not amending
the bill. I want to be clear,
because I think we've got to get
this right and this is gonna
bipartisan support.
But, uh, uh, my inclination is
not to support this right at
this moment, with the
understanding that as we move
forward,
Between now and when it goes on
the floor, you all and the whole
team that's worked on this have
a chance to look at it, see what
works, what doesn't work, and
what we agree upon is what goes
on as a floor amendment, which I
don't think it's gonna be any
problem for
Anyone on the floor, uh, given
the strong support both sides on
this bill, so that's just
another.
I idea as to how we might handle
it.
Others? Anyone else?
All right, so I think the motion
before us is the adoption of the
amendment as it stands, um, even
mindful of your suggestions and
words so on the proposed
amendment.
Mr. Chair, I mean, if that's the
will of the committee, I'll
withdraw it.
I think that that's gonna
probably get you better mileage
with the committee right now. I
think again in fairness to the
sponsors, I, I hear said a word
suggesting that there may be
some good things in here we
could best way that we do, best
way to do this is on the floor.
I think we hate to do it that
way, but there are some external
Horses that work here that we
should all recognize, so the,
the my hearen doing
willingness to withdraw it. I
appreciate that very much and,
and you're willingness to work
with the sponsors and see if we
can get their blessing,
ultimately on it. So we're gonna
consider that amendment then
withdrawn, right, back to the
bill without amendments.
Hermanus.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman of, uh,
Mr. Speaker, in Martinez, a
couple of things, uh, and I'll
try to go quick. The um
Support the bill, no question,
uh.
But the um
The administratively attached,
uh, not without going into a
whole lot of explanation. The
magic words, uh,
administratively attached,
pursue, and I'm looking at the
bottom of two top of 3
administratively attached
pursuant to Section 9-1-7, boom,
that does it. That's the
cleanest, best way to attach an
agency when we add more words,
it creates
Uh, differences of opinion,
confusion.
And all kinds of crazy uh on
occasion. So I would move, uh,
I'd ask you to consider uh
proposed amendment on top of
page 3, line one.
Beginning with the word the.
Striking up.
Striking of the
After 1978 period striking the
remainder of the line.
And then striking.
Uh
Line 2.
Uh
Uh
Through the period.
Motion before us for an
amendment.
Other committee discussion.
Mr. Chair, uh, so what, what's
the reason for striking that
language? I thought that
language actually makes it
abundantly clear.
That it is, it is
administratively attached with.
Autonomy over its own budget,
which is important, that's the
situation you're dealing with.
And what I'm concerned, I, I
hear the, the issue with the
Attorney general being
The entity that this is attached
to has also caused me some
heartburn. This language
actually helps me.
Because like, we don't want
this, this needs to be its own
stand up.
Kind of appointment to to run
this office, not something
that's directly under and
interfered with and budget-wise
with the Attorney General is the
way I look at that. So I just,
I'm curious what, what's the
thinking for taking that
language out.
Mr. Chairman Sawor cause that
language, uh cause 9-1-7 covers
it. The the statute covers it.
It talks about
A budget, it talks about
decisions when you, when we add
language.
In the statue, it, you can
suggest, a lawyer could suggest
it conflicts with 9-17, and it
just creates more havoc than
it's worth.
The, you know, we try to make it
more clear, but it, but it
But it makes it more convoluted
if someone wants to make a
convoluted. I don't think it
would happen because the
Attorney general is a lateral
executive. We're not attaching
it to any uh executive that's
under the governor, which I
think we need that, that
separation of powers.
But, um
But when you read up
You know, so 99-1-7.
A 2, the agency shall submit its
budgetary request through the
department. Well, someone could
say, well, our office shall
maintain autonomy over our
budget, so we're not gonna,
gonna request our budget through
the department. I, I just
I just, it pains me with what's
happening at DPS.
And the surfboard because we
tried to make it more clear and
it just, it leaves it up to
interpretation. Anyway, that's
my answer. Close the moment I'll
go back to the sponsors as their
practice is at a constructive
amendment
this respectfully
and other questions on the
proposed amendment.
All right, um, is there
objection to adoption of the
amendment shall we?
So Senator O'Malley, Senator
Worth, Senator Bradley, Senator
Thornton, Senator Paul, that
amendment fails. I should stop
before that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. This bill says um
Attorney General
5 times.
And it says State Department of
Justice 2 times.
I, I can't find the State
Department of Justice and the
Constitution. Um, so, but
regardless of which way we go,
it should probably be the same.
Therefore
I suggest we use Attorney
General. Um, with all due
respect to the Department of
Justice. So on page 2,
Like 25.
I move, um,
Uh
Uh, State Department of Justice.
And insert in Lutherov attorney
general.
And I'll take a moment to
sponsors. Hope you'll make good
note and, and keep good notes of
these proposed amendments, even
if they don't go on better do
instead of being proposed the
amendments, work with you, we
may want to roll some of these
into into this I'm not
suggesting that we won't adopt
Senator Master's amendment at
this time, but on the assumption
that we're not gonna adopt it.
Please make good note that you
may wanna.
on in some of these's ideas.
but we'll,
we'll, we'll roll with it. I, I
take your point, uh, if I may,
on the proposed amendment.
Uh, this whole, I mean this is a
long discussion about the whole
Department of Justice, and
there's, there's very little
doubt in my mind that the next
one who gets elected is going to
change it probably back to the
Gulf of Mexico or something. I
don't know. I mean, you know,
we're, we're at that point where
you know, change the name of
whatever we want because we can
and and it makes people think
interesting things, I guess, so,
um, I, I, we, we have now a
mess, right? We have all kinds
of statues.
and laws refer to Department of
Justice and the Attorney
General's office and again, I
have very little doubt that the
next uh occupant of the office
probably gonna change it right
back to Attorney General's
office, um, and we shouldn't
invest too much time and effort
in in worrying too much about
that, but I do take your point,
Senator, that there's
inconsistency with this, so
Senator De, because you're gonna
be perhaps looking at additional
amendments I suggested would be
out of the room that the Senator
Maestas has Senator Maestas may
have some amendments that you
would want to consider in
addition to those that you're.
right now, so the proposed that
he's making is to note the
inconsistency in the bill
between references to the
Department of Justice versus
Attorney General's office, which
we've now got probably
everywhere in our law, um, and
I'm glad we spend our time and
energy doing that.
So
Yes, chairman. That's a friendly
amendment.
So changing the Department of
Justice on page 2.
25 to Attorney General's office.
Yes, chair.
All right. Uh, is there any
objection to adopting that
amendment?
See done better.
Yep.
Yeah, no, there's only one more.
Right, so, Emily, are you with
us? You sure? Right, right. Is
there any objection to adopting
that amendment, that amendments
adopted,
um, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Representatives. The,
um, and then, uh, same amendment
if you turn to page 6.
Line 4.
86 lane 4, strike State
Department of Justice and insert
in lie thereof.
Attorney General's office.
I assume the sponsor's going to
treat this the same and consider
that constructive, unless you
Give me some indication
otherwise and I assume the
committee will vote the same
way. Is there any objection to
adopting that amendment?
on that amendments adopted as
well too. Emily, still with me?
All right, very good. my.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representatives on the, on uh
Page 3.
Um
We have a
As the bill was originally
written, we have a six-year
term.
Now I'm not sure how long the
term is.
Um, so we gotta figure that one
out, uh, but also when she asked
him.
Oh
So, uh, figure it out, uh, chair
Rosen, how long is the term?
Where does it state that?
turn in and Senator Maestas, it
is a six-year term and the
timelines that are identified on
page 3 include the time frames
that the committee will be
selected and convened to appoint
an advocate.
Mr. Chap representatives, I
thought that was struck in a
House amendment.
I thought those lines were
struck in a house in right.
I thought it struck line 78, and
9 on page 3.
Um, I have, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
have a judiciary Committee, um.
committee report and it says on
page 3.
Line 9, I'm sorry, forgive me,
forgive me, page 3 line 6,
strike the comma.
Strike lines 7 and 8 and strike
line 9 up into the period.
So that 6 year term has been, is
not in the bill as we see it.
Today.
Mr. Cha, so that was one of the
reasons why we were striking.
uh, judiciary Committee
Amendment one that we remember,
we remember.
Um,
Chairman, uh, Senator Maestas.
So, uh, when this bill was in
House Judiciary, they did strike
this uh language.
But
Not the 6 years.
Um, the reason why the language
was changed from uh beginning
July 1st, 2020, 25, and shall
end on December 31st, 2025 with
a recognition that this bill
takes effect if signed on July
1st, 2025, and so the
respective, uh,
Governor, uh, legislators who
are tasked with appointing
somebody to the selection
committee could not then appoint
the child advocate at the same
time, so that's why that
language was struck, um, but
The appointment is still for a
term of 6 years.
And I will tell you it's very
difficult trying to track this.
It doesn't. You won't find it.
So I think a friendly amendment
would be to add back the 6
years, but to eliminate after
the comma.
Yeah, I think that's what
Senator Du was trying to do too,
so yeah.
Mhm
OK.
Oh.
So it looks like the motion
about the motion is just to
strike House judiciary.
Committee, uh, amendment
paragraph one. I, I wouldn't,
Mr. Chairman, I wouldn't make
that motion. I would
specifically just put line 7
back in, I think line 8 and 9.
Uh
Don't make any sense to me.
Make the motion how you wish it,
Senator. Thank you. So, Mr.
Chair, representatives, I, I
After, um, after, uh,
State child's advocate.
Uh, I, I, at the end of line 6.
I move that we insert.
Uh
who shall be appointed for a
term of 6 years.
Mr. Chair, can I ask a question.
If we're waiting to do the same
things that are in this
amendment to the 4 where, why
are we doing this right now?
Because uh I didn't think we
would do any of these
amendments, but now that we're
getting into surgery, you're
right, which I think we just do
all of yours now, probably so.
Um, I don't see any other way to
do it since we're attacking it.
This bill's gonna get rolled
over, um, then I'll, I, I, I
would try that in a moment if I
could just make two more points
and I'll say something,
yeah, sure, Senator Wellley, um,
I'm gonna finish the committee,
I mean, I, I can't make the
decision for the committee. The
committee can challenge the
ruling of the chair, but, um, I,
I appreciate the time pressures
and sensitivity. We've already
added some amendments to this
bill at this point in time, so
O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I was
just concerned about this as
well, this sort of the process
because we seem to agree as a
committee that um these would
probably likely be floor
amendments, clean up and that
sort of thing, which is my
understanding is said to my this
is really doing the same thing
and that uh it would make more
sense to get this uh particular
bill out of committee and then
as you as it as as was mentioned
to to do 4 amendments and didn't
think it was gonna be that much.
that much pushback or problems
with it, so, um, I guess that's
why I would like to see us scope
uh with all due respect to the
amendment makers.
I just saw the floor. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I would
Just we, um, you come with some
agreements on some amendments
and we
We amended Friday, we can roll
the clock, but having said that,
what I would ask you to consider
between now and
D-Day is on page 3 line 18.
That instead of the governor may
remove, I would suggest we.
Insert in lie thereof the
Attorney General.
I know the, the governor, uh,
this is, this is a, this is an
independent agency that's
examining.
An agency that's controlled by
the governor. Um,
And then also, uh,
Also, a slight, what might be a
contradiction on page 5, talking
about the um the committee it
says immediately after receiving
nominations, the Governor
attorney general may make 11
request, which is great, one
request to the committee for
submission of additional names.
But then you have uh
Then you have on page 6.
Subparagraph E, after the
initial meeting of the
committee, the governor or a
majority of the committee may
call subsequent meetings plural
of the committee.
The nominate persons to fill the
current, so we got to figure
that one out and then also um
I think the committee initially
made, made a couple of times,
uh, but uh those are just a
couple of the things.
That might be tightened up, uh.
If you soak cho cho.
Oh
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
committee members were, uh,
we're on, we're back on the
bill.
So, uh, representative, uh, uh,
Mr. Speaker, Representative
Martinez, would you
prefer to uh do these amendments
between now and the floor
and or to move the bill out. Um,
no, that was my question to
move, in other words, assuming
it's gonna get amended, do the
amendments from this committee
and the floor as opposed to in
this committee, uh, at a later
date.
Members of the committee.
Mr. Chair, I, I support um the
speakers uh request and that,
um, we get this bill out, and
then we have those that
opportunity. It was suggested by
uh the chair that uh uh Senator
Duha have a package and just
package all those things
together, and just be one big
amendment sort of situation.
And I think it will go through,
it seems like it will.
OK.
That's all, uh, so you that
emotion, but I guess there's,
there's not enough of us.
OK.
There's a motion for a due pass.
I would, um,
I'm inclined to vote for any
friendly amendment on the floor.
Uh, but I'm not inclined to vote
for any unfriendly amendments on
the floor, just me personally,
um.
And what else do you consider
the couple, the couple of things
that I proposed.
Um
And then the dates, the dates on
line 8 and 9, they were there
originally for a reason I kind
of think those through.
Uh, we know this, this doesn't
become law.
Technically, till um
Till July 1st.
I would hope that the leadership
has their nominees, you know,
decided on and, and
And that they can start meeting
right away in July.
Um, well, let me, uh,
We do have a quorum, um, there's
a motion for a due pass any
further discussion.
Yes, no, I would do the one
amendment and then I made two
suggestions.
But it formally make uh there's,
yeah, I, I had an amendment. We
amended the, the Department of
Justice, we made two amendments.
Then I made a proposed amendment
and withdrew it and then it made
two suggestions.
Yeah and I
with the two amendments, yeah,
there's 2 amendments that were
adopted, I believe, but you
would know. OK, OK, great, yeah,
there was just two adoptions,
uh, if, if there was not a
motion in my opinion, but if
there was, I withdraw it
officially on the table. So we
have a do pass motion for
hospital 5 as amended.
Um, all those, all those, let's
give our folks a chance cause I
think they wanna like.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
speak to this bill. I know this
bill very well.
I, um, I know this bill well
because I carried this exact
bill, but you know who wrote
this bill? This committee.
I walked into Senate Judiciary
and it was my first Edward
Scissorhand moments, much like
what you just experienced there
andenate Judiciary wrote this
bill exactly.
As it appears before us. I
walked in with something, and
this is what they sent us out
with. It was that year, Mr.
Speaker, that it got delayed in
the house, and I'm happy to see
it back before us exactly how
judiciary wrote and and sent me
out the door with this bill.
And I will say that I am happy
to see it here again. You have a
very powerful story. I think you
make a fantastic messenger for
this bill, um, and I wish you
all the best getting this across
the finish line. I'm hopeful
that you will, and I hope to,
uh, I hope to cheer you on and
champion you as you continue on
to get this done, but this is
the time for legislators to act.
This is the bill that we decided
years ago that we wanted and so
I'm happy to see you carry this
on and I'm happy to support it
tonight. Thank you.
He read me motion, but I'm not
gonna cut off the debate just
yet. Anybody else on the bill
with a motion before us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, Reverend
Martinez Arizon a way that I
would ask maybe 2 or 3 floor
amendments, obviously it's our
floor amendments, but 2 or 34
amendments.
Uh
And then, uh
You know, so we can pass the
majority of them as opposed to
one blanket up or down big
amendment, it'd be great if you
could communicate with the
amendment makers whether they're
friendly or not, and, and, and
do the
Do the floor amendments to to
impact the bill as best as
possible. Thank you.
So I think it's pretty obvious
that we're gonna see a lower
version of this bill that's
gonna look a little bit
different than we have here
today that are do it can be an
important part of that is the
important part of that, and
there may be others, but um I
don't see any alternative but to
a floor, uh, so we, we try
really hard over here not to
send out pages and pages of
amendments so you will have to
digest them back over the other
chamber we try and set it up.
You're gonna see a lot of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitutes.
Um, if I could take just a
moment.
Um
Earlier, you may not have been
here speakers, but, but I, I
was, uh, rightfully uh uh amused
by those who pointed out the
fact that sometimes I've said
things that maybe I'm not
consistent with and they and
they they were reading my own
words back to me.
Uh, which I somewhat enjoy
actually sometimes when I'm
wrong.
I'm one of those unique people.
I, I love being wrong cause I,
for me, it means I'm growing
and, and um I want to grow.
Um
As a Catholic, we're big on
confession and absolution.
So, so I, I need some
absolution.
Uh, for the last several years,
this initiative has been in
front of us in one form or the
other.
And for several of those years,
I resisted.
Um, and use the authority that I
had as the chair of this
committee to, to express that
resistance because the governor
herself has described this
agency, her own agency is
dysfunctional, that's her word,
not mine. Um, and for years
there have been initiatives to
do some very fundamental changes
to this dysfunctional agency,
um, and I've resisted those
because it didn't make sense to
me to, to have another reporting
agency, another individual
overseeing this because we've
got the co-neutrals report.
Uh, we've got the arbitrator's
report.
Uh, how many reports do I need
to tell me all of the things
that I, I have those reports all
here. I'm happy to read them and
we had all night long, but the
fundamental take of this is the
agency's failing and it's
getting worse. It's getting
worse all the time.
Um,
The absolution is for all those
years when I, we had a a prior
secretary due respect to the
current secretary, we had a
prior secretary who would call
me up and say we need more time.
Uh, could you, could you give me
more time? I wanna, I wanna do
better and.
Um, she was in the esteemed
jurist and we had a lot of
respect for her, but um didn't
happen.
And, and yet I, I resisted the
notion that we need to create
more government, more
bureaucracy to tell us the
bureaucracy is failing and not
working. We need to put somebody
else in charge of an agency
that's not working by putting
somebody else in there to tell
them they're not getting it
done. It just seems absurd to
me. It always has seemed absurd
to me, and so for several years
now I've resisted this type of
initiative to say that we need
more government to tell us the
government isn't working, let's
put another, put another
government actor in this case,
with this bill another elected
official to oversee a function
of the government.
uh, and the executive branch
because we consider that to be
failing now, I hope you can all
understand the absurdity that
but for I have to take
responsibility for the last
several years, I've tried to
resist this type of initiative,
and I've come to the end of my
rope.
Um, and, and I feel the, the
need for absolution because I
think as a result of, of perhaps
my attitude here, um, I think
some kids have been hurt.
Um
I, I know some kids have been
hurt, and, and maybe we need to
do this years ago, maybe we need
to put somebody else in charge
of this a long time ago. It
doesn't make sense to me to to
create uh a, a, a different
process, but
I've been hoping for, uh, I've
been hoping for a change.
And it hasn't happened.
Um, and I say that with a lot of
respect for the secretary. She's
been very courageous. She's been
here tonight.
She's been here every time we've
had a meeting in the interim,
she's, she's a bit courageous to
show up.
But
Your favorite.
Um, and I can't put it nicely.
Um, and your predecessor failed
too.
And I can't put that nicely,
and, and those are, those are
harsh words, and I know they're
gonna sting, um, when I heard
the prior secretary say, look,
uh, Joseph, if you have, if you
have these hearings, uh, you
discourage our employees, you
discourage our agency. I, I, I
believe that I, that was true
and it was resident, so I
resisted. I resisted those
criticisms, but, um, now I feel
responsible for uh what I read
in the conneutrals report, I
feel responsible for what the
arbitrator has found.
which is just a continuing
failing.
Of this agency and and getting
worse all the time.
So I, I asked for, uh,
forgiveness of my colleagues.
And for a lot of children.
And I'm going to support the
bill.
Want to do pass motion.
Is there any objection?
There's not all present voting
for do pass
as admitted, yes, thank you very
much.
That completes our work for the
evening. Thank you.
