move around. We put the bills in
the order of the number just so
we can keep track of them easier
so they're in numerical order,
but that's not the word we're
gonna hear things in, so, but
you're right, 244, uh,
representatives, go ahead, just.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'll make.
Uh, let's see, uh, we are here.
I'm joined today by my
co-sponsor Andre Andrea Reeb,
representative Reeb and Sarah
Jacobs, who's a deputy director
of the administrative Office of
the courts. Uh, we are here
today to present House Bill 244,
uh, it is a bill to provide for
raising the minimum age of
magistrate courts to 28.
Years of age, which under the
current statute is currently
established at 18.
And we stand for Christians.
And support our opposition
members of the committee.
Questions or comments.
I.
Senator Stewart with a due pass
any other debate or discussion?
Is there any objection? See no,
you have a dopes.
Thank you very much. Have a good
afternoon.
Um,
do we have, uh, are you 117
To.
What numbers 117.
That certificate by physician
assistant.
Thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I am part of this
bill for uh a bipartisan group
over in the house, uh,
representative Ferrari and uh
Oh, Luis Terasas, and for the
University of New Mexico Office
of Medical Investigator by
allowing physicians' assistants
to declare death on an
individual or after their
diagnosis for many months. It
will assist the OMI in cutting
back their cases. And that's it.
I'm sorry, members of the
committee wasn't on my
microphone. We have nobody
supporting or opposing register
and support for opposition, so
on House Bill 1170 members of
committeeer my. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Spanics would do pass.
There are any objections I do
pass motioning done
do best Thank you very much.
Uh, Representative Hopeman B.
Hill anyway, Senator Duke, you
didn't know.
House Bill 87.
Thank
you, Mr. Cha and then be held.
And what House Bill 87 does is
that it says that for the
definition of criminal sexual
contact, uh, right now, that
would be, it's only criminal
sexual contact of the person who
is being uh groped for lack of a
better word, uh is unclothed.
This would make it if they are
clothed as well, and also in the
House Judiciary Committee, there
was some language added in, uh,
regarding the intent that would
have to be behind.
Uh,
such, uh,
Broken, I wish I would be with
the intent to arouse or gratify
sexual desire, um,
And Mr. Chair, that's about it.
All right, thank you. If no
one's registered support
opposition.
Oh good.
Hello my representative.
Mr. Chairman,
thank you, Madam Vice Chair. I
appreciate it.
We're here to talk about House
Bill 87. Um, Mr. Turner, we have
an amendment. If you wanna go
through that quickly or if you
want me to just go ahead on the
original bill firstendment for
discussion purposes. I'll take
that motion without objection,
uh, explain the amendment,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So all this does is add
additional language to the First
Amendment and the House
Judiciary to mimic the language
in
U U J I.
14-132.
Unlawfulness as an element. Um,
Mr. Chairman and well, that's
the moment.
Thank you, Representative, um,
members can you, can you first
of all explain what's the
striking House Judiciary
Committee, uh, the first
paragraph of this amendment due.
It's a consequence of that?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the committee,
it should be uh striking the,
the first paragraph, it should
just be adding to it. Um,
So, insert with the intent to
arouse or gratify sexual desire
or to intrude upon the bodily
integrity or personal safety of
the victim for any other
unlawful purpose. Um, and after
the insert closed or and remove
the brackets. So in-house
judiciary, Mr. Chairman, um, we
had just added the, with the
intent to arouse or gratify
sexual desire, and we had left
out the additional or to intrude
upon the bodily integrity of
personal safety. So this just um
Puts the additional language in
there to follow the U UJI
exactly.
And, and the First Amendment is
being struck from House
judiciary actually that language
is put back in, in the summer to
the amendment.
And, and would you just again,
uh, how would you highlight the
language that differs with this
proposed language from the House
Judiciary which just start that
again. It begins with the word
or after desire, is that right?
or to intrude upon the bodily
integrity or personal safety of
the victim or for any other
unlawful purpose.
you here. Now, all that would be
new here, Mr. Chairman. That's
correct.
OK, on the amendment members
questions to the amendment.
Mr. Chaman Ockton V. Hill
Center. What, what's the uh the
line of the amount, the line on
the page.
Um
Page one, line 21 after the
comma, yeah.
Others questions?
I'm uh
I'm not seeing anybody else.
I'm, I'm
Central or we, you, are you
saying to intrude upon bodily
integrity, that's all UJI
language, Chairman, um,
uh, yes, that's correct for
personal safety the victim.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, that's
all you JI language what is the
title of that UJI? Do you know?
You said 14132.
So, um, I believe it's
unlawfulness as an element,
14-132.
And that's unlawfulness is
defined as what the unlawfulness
is. That's correct.
Mhm.
Mr. Hare, without putting both
parts of, of what would be
unlawful in here, then by law,
we would be making it that any,
uh,
I dream that was for the
Where the intent was to intrude
upon the bodily integrity of
personal battery, then that
would just be uh a a normal
battery and not criminal sexual
content.lawfulness to find
within criminal sexual conduct.
Where the intent was to intrude
upon the bodily integrity of
personal battery, then that
would just be uh a a normal
battery and not criminal sexual
content.lawfulness to find
within criminal sexual conduct's
defined in that UJI.
OK.
You out of here, so thank you.
All right. Any other questions?
I've got
my on
my system. Is there any
objection to adopt the
amendment?
I'll be adopted, uh, on the bill
itself that my.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative Huffmanee
Hill Senter do with the um.
So
So I always thought, I was, this
was a while back, but I always
thought, um,
Unclothed was a felony and
clothed was a misdemeanor under
today's law.
But is there a section of
unclosed.
sexual contact that's not in the
bill.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, not
to my knowledge. I'm not a
criminal lawyer by trade, but,
uh, not to my knowledge, no.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, the um
Under this bill as written, uh,
So, if I could draw your
attention to page 2 lines 15.
And I'm sorry, page 7, I'm
sorry, line 17 and line 18 on
page 2, 17 and 18 on page 2, so.
What in your opinion?
Under this bill, not not crime
law, but under this bill, what
would be a what would constitute
a misdemeanor?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
this would constitute a
misdemeanor. Um, however, the
change that we're making is it
removes the element of the
requirement of being unclothed.
This could be a misdemeanor
whether or not the um victim is
closed or unclothed, if the
other unlawfulness elements are
met.
I see. And so,
So just, um, if you look on line
8.
It says, um,
For line 9 and 10 rather.
For coercion that results in
personal injury to the victims
of 4th degree, and then you jump
down to 17 and 18, it says uh.
A misdemeanor when perpetuated
with the use of force or
coercion.
Do we want to say force or
coercion that does not result in
personal injury.
Or just leave it like that. This
is current law, so uh Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I would, I
had not, that has not been
contemplated and this is current
law. Um, and so, another thing
to bring your attention to, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, is that
there were in the additional, if
you could go to the amendments
in context, um, we did change
some of the, um, there were some
exceptions to the rule that
we're kind of um
Strange and I, I think, um,
Um, based in the original law
which has not been changed since
1993, and I think that um taking
out those exceptions make it a
little more clear, Mr. Chairman,
and Senator as to the degree of
misdemeanor and that this
continues to be a misdemeanor
with the additional elements of
the UJI, so it's just cleaner
this way.
And then thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman Representative Omanbis,
and I won't make up.
And I remember, but maybe we
can.
Talk about it in the interim if
it's necessary, but it appears
like it's not necessary. Thank
you.
The
Any other discussion, pleasure
of the committee, Senator
Stewart.
when I moved to pass as amended
on.
Give me the numbers.
Hospital 87.
There any further discussion? Is
there any objections?
them.
You do best.
Thank you, Mr.
Wasn't that easy
representative see oh you see
incredibly easy, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate you think
everything's like conservation.
It's just not.
It's, it's because early in the
morning.
It is an inside joke.
Thank you. Um, so, uh, represent
Matthews, I see you here and I'm
looking around the room for
others. So, um, please note if
you're here for Interstate
Medical Compact, is that what
you're looking for?
OK. Well, so we've added that uh
late in the day. We're gonna
probably still be about another
hour before that one too. And I
just want to let you know you're
welcome to join us and we're
happy to have you here, but, um,
we'll come get you too if you
give us a place and I don't mean
for you to have to sit here and
you don't lose anything by not
being here. OK. So, but you're
welcome to be here. Um,
Let's see, we did we lose rips
and Reed already?
We did, right? He was here.
So,
uh,
Sarah Silva, I see a house 203,
right? Right, we, we can hear
that one next 2 or 3.
OK, and we have someone
registered with you, uh,
Representative Sarah,
right, on Zoom
we, we don't have anybody
registered in opposition, so,
uh, if you could begin, but
we're gonna keep you pretty
tight. We're moving fast, OK?
But
chair and committee, um, I'm
here today to present host Bill
203. This bill was initiated
when our expert who is parking
and on their way approach to
representative Dixon after going
through a series of depositions
from the Dunkley lawsuit, uh,
and discovering that CYFD had no
data retention policies. Now,
there is a data retention policy
for all state agencies, but
every child in foster care has
an open lawsuit. CYFD versus.
as their parents, allowing CYFD
to wipe the phones and laptops
of outgoing employees,
especially with their high
turnover rate will expose it to
legal spoliation claims.
HB 203s ensures due process. It
creates a new section of the
children, youth and Families
Department Act. The bill
requires that CYFD employees
only use their department issue
devices for communication
related to their assigned duties
and noncompliance is considered
grounds for termination. HB 203
also requires the department to
create a system approved by the
Department of Information and
Technology, do it, that backs up
all electronic records generated
and received by employees on a
daily.
monthly and annual basis. This
data must be saved for at least
7 years prior to the termination
of an employee's employment.
So, um, and with that, um, I
will withhold my comments for
any questions or rebuttals.
Thank you, Chair
and were you intending to have
this Crea answer any questions
for your help.
I'm sorry, can you repeat that?
Yeah, as I indicated we had Crea
registered in support was she
somebody you needed to ask any
questions of.
She is my expert witness. So
she's available to you if we
need to, all right thank you.
All right, and there'll be no
one else registered to support
or opposition members of the
committee, please.
doing
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Representative, do you, are any
of CYFDs uh employees unionized?
I'm just wondering if there's
any collective bargaining
agreements in place that this
will potentially violate.
Thank you, Mr. Terry. Thank you,
Representative. Um, it does not
violate them. Um, my
understanding is that they are
separate.
And I'm sorry, Mr. Chas
separate, what, what do, what do
you mean in terms of
Um,
How this would be handled, um,
in terms of termination, is that
the question? It does not, um,
the process still would
their collective bargaining.
Miss
you, even though it says uh
Brits grounds for immediate
termination.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, yes,
um, I can.
Try to get an expert to provide
clarification, but that came up
in our house government
committee. That's fine, Mr. Cha.
I mean, if, if it's already been
addressed and you are confident
that that that's not going to
violate any uh CBA and satisfied
with that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mister Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Rosino Silva,
Representative Dixidby on that
same topic, um,
Um
Let's say
An employee sending up CYFD
email, and they
They press it and it goes, you
know, on their phone in a hurry,
it goes from their personal
email then maybe that.
The next day they catch it and
they put it on their, you know,
they back it up and send it out
again. I mean, is this necessary
to say may comes to grounds for
immediate termination should you
don't you think it's gonna be
followed because it's the law.
My question is, is this
necessary to put employees on
the hook for being fired.
Um, thank you, Senator, uh, or
chair and senator. I think that
the um
Issue has been, um, and I
realized that our expert uh is
not here in person, is that
employees have had their devices
wiped of materials that should
have been retained, and that is
what we're trying to
Make clear is unacceptable.
Um, you know, I think
incidental, uh, sort of
accidental emailing from a
personal account, um, is very
different and should be handled
differently than um the wiping
of a device of all records of a
case and how it was handled. Um,
and I, I know you guys are on a
quick time schedule, but if
you'd like, our expert is here
and could certainly speak about
um the case, uh, that this
Bill is essentially derived
from No thank you what makes you
believe we're on a pay.
But
Thank you, as Chairman.
Representative. No, I appreciate
that I, um, it's shocking to me
that
That the department would, that
anyone would intentionally erase
stuff.
For purposes other than just
cleaning out the
The file or whatnot, but it
doesn't say.
If you erase files or if you
misplaced files, it just says if
you fail to comply.
May be grounds for immediate
termination. If I was a boss and
I didn't like my subordinate, I
just
Wait for my opportunity to fire
them, um.
So anyway, I'm just a little
uncomfortable with this language
may constitute grounds for
immediate termination. I, I
understand the importance of it
to emphasize.
To the worker, but this still
allows a window that
I believe it's anti-worker.
Uh, chair and Senator Maestas, I
want to introduce our expert
witness there, Krika, um, and uh
she can answer, answer that
question.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Silva, I'm
OK, from a, I'll ask it again,
so, so it'll be appropriate for
Ms. Craer to answer. We know
what's the policy argument?
Yes.
Mr. Chair, Senator Maestas, so
An employee's failure to comply
would be grounds for maybe be
grounds for termination,
however, also procedures for
termination of a state employees
still apply, as well as union
policy and procedure, there's
absolutely due process involved,
um, the key issue is that
This is a mass exfoliation
practice that continues to this
day, the, the, the, the point of
the bill and the function of the
bill is to end the agency's
current practice of wiping the
factory via factory reset and
having state-issued cellphones
and laptops that contain an
enormous amount of evidence
because these workers are in the
field. They're not at their
desk. Their laptops and phones
are containing photos, text
messages, notes.
Cas planning, um, everything
goes to service provision in an
individual case. So it's just to
to enforce a rule that the
agency has to have backup for
each of these devices. I hope
I've answered your question, Mr.
Chair. No, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Crook.
I appreciate you. The, um,
We understand the, I'm sorry.
We understand
Getting rid of files, erasing
files, spoliation. This doesn't
say spoliation. It says failure
to comply.
So if someone inadvertently
sends an email and cause when I
touch my phone and I want to
email my colleague.
I press the email.
Being in the right-hand corner
and it's, it comes from Mo
Justice. So I have to press Mo
Justice and click it to the NM
ledges.
So this, if a, if a worker did
that, they could be fired. So my
question is, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representatives.
How do we know spo applies? How
do we know, uh, a union contract
in the future would trump state
statute.
Mr.
Chair my ass because nothing in
this bill is inconsistent with
the fact that it, it creates
like a new grounds for
termination. It doesn't trump or
replace po policy procedure or
union policy and procedure, and
most importantly, it goes to the
backup, not the sending
information, but the backup of
the information when you gave
your example of sending an
email.
If you then wipe your phone,
it's backed up.
That's, that's, that's the
purpose of this film is to
retain the records so that there
are automatic backups of each
device.
Um, so that
When a family wants to access
your records.
There's a backup copy of those
records, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
This actually doesn't say
spoliation.
If a worker literally erased
their phone.
This, this bill wouldn't apply.
But if the worker
Uh fails to only use electronic
devices, it would apply, so.
Where does it say if a worker
erases their files, they may be
immediately terminated.
As the bill, Mr. Chairman does
not say that. So theoretically
someone could erase their phone.
And face no consequences under
this statute, but they get
inadvertently sent an email from
their private.
Email account and face the
consequences. So to me that's
just a contradiction. I, I, I, I
agree with what you're doing. I
want this to become law, um, but
it just, um,
It should say spoliation instead
of only you, but anyway, anyway,
thank you Mr. Chair, Senator, I
really appreciate this question.
I think I understand the
confusion. So at subpart A
confused.
I'm reading the bill, right, but
spoliation is not included
because it's a legal term of
art, and it, it can either be
done with intention or
negligently, and our state, if
you go to the, there's there's a
tort exfoliation under New
Mexico law, which is actually
rare. Normally, it is just a
sanction for discovery
violation.
But our state actually has a
legal claim for civilliation,
but if you go to subsection A,
where it's the, the part we're
concerned about, employees of
the department shall only use
their electron electronic
devices issued by the
department.
Or communication related to the
performance of duties within the
scope of their employment by the
department. They're in failure
to comply.
Maine constitute grounds for
termination. The reason we have
that is because, and you'll
notice when we have CYFD
management, top brass, workers
coming before this committee and
any other legislative body, they
have 2 phones.
There's a very common use in
practice of personal cell phone
use for work purposes. And if
they hadn't done that in the
Dunkley lawsuit, we may never
have known because the personal
phones weren't wiped that the
manager had actually with
intent, wiped and erased.
files in anticipation of
litigation. So if that makes
sense, we're talking about
Disallowing by subpart A, the
use of personal devices. That's
the grounds that that could be
grounds for termination. We
don't have to say spoliation
because we have a tort
exfoliation under New Mexico
law. It's also, I've got to be
honest with you, a legal term of
art that even judges get
confused about. Um, so we would
want to go to that statue to
define spoliation or it is also
a sanction for discovery.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let's
use the word erase.
I understand we want them to use
their CYD phone and not their
personal phone, and if they use
their personal phone, they face
termination, but if they take
their CYFD phone and they erase
it.
Which a lawyer could argue
spoliation if they erase it,
there's no consequence.
Why?
I see what you're saying, and I
think that could go to um
development and rules, but also
there's a backup.
Because of this act, there would
then be a backup, and we don't
need it in this rule because we
have the tort exfoliation, which
you've just described an intent,
you've just described the torto
foliation, so we can have that
claim. I hear what you're saying
about grounds for termination,
but I also don't think that, I
mean, I certainly hope there's
CYFD policy that if you're
purposely erasing information
and not keeping compliance with
With the law and rules, that
that could be grounds for
termination. I hear what you're
saying. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mrs. C. I'm persuaded
by the, by the backup.
That answers that alleviates my
concern, but it, it, it.
You basically, basically said
you'd rather have the tort and
the claim rather than not the
tort. I, I would rather not have
the tour.
Everyone else in the committee.
they're doing with the DuP Pais
motion of discussion.
Um, I have a couple of
questions. If you know the
answers to this, I wouldn't be
surprised if you may not be the
bill gets employees of this
department shall only use
electronic devices issued by the
department. Do we have such a
restriction on any other state
agency or employees of the
state?
A chair and committee, uh, we're
not sure. Um, there are state
regulations so that um that help
direct every state agency for uh
records retention, but not every
state agency is like CYFD, um,
so yeah, my question is pretty
straightforward, which is, is
there such a policy for any
other agency, a branch of
government you're aware of,
then, then uh CYFD that we would
be adopting here.
Mr. Chair, not that I'm aware
of, and I think as
representatives pointed out,
these are investigators and
they're in the field. They're,
they're really unlike any other
state employee because of the
nature of the job they do, and
it's a core function of their
job to collect data, pursuant to
investigations, Mr. Chair
I understand that at the same
time, I would say the same thing
about the environment
department, right? Uh, going out
and investigating oil spills or,
or food, uh, restaurants or
maybe I could pick any number of
state agencies where they're
using their devices.
To record information that's
investigative. There's plenty of
places, all of our law
enforcement are essentially
doing the same thing too, so I'm
just kind of curious about that,
um, and, and again I, I began by
saying I wouldn't be surprised
if you all didn't know the
answer to that and hadn't
investigated, um, I, I like, uh,
my colleagues and concerned
about the
Language that follows that the
failure complies immediate
grounds for termination. Um, I
think that does fly in the face
of collective bargaining
agreements probably would never
fly, would never be a force to
see all the folks nodding their
heads. You can't immediately
terminate people in most cases,
I would probably suggest you
striking that from the bill, but
I'll wait to see how the other
members feel about that
suggestion, um, and
I'll just say that I think it's
unfortunate that this bill is
before us because the what I'm
hearing from all of you is that
this is intended to address what
I think most of us would
consider to be misconduct,
right, reprehensible conduct
that people are um clearing cell
phones to avoid misconduct or
trying to essentially impede the
administration of justice and um
that's always deplorable to hear
from any uh anybody in state
government or really anybody,
anybody who is really trying to
serve the public, so I'm a
little concerned about
sometimes.
Where we have a bad actors and
then we pass laws to deal with
those bad actors in an isolated
incidents rather than correcting
the, the people who are
responsible for it and making
sure that they're not in a
position to do it again or, or
the um there, there are
intentions are very clear to
them, so I'm, I'm troubled by
the need for the bill. I'm
troubled that we have the bill,
but I, I'm always also very
cautious to recognize we're
seeing this a lot these days
where
With CYD is a good example.
We're taking away authority from
the executive branch from the
governor's, uh, of, of, of
administration really and and
putting in this session, we were
gonna put it in the attorney
General's office, right? Um,
we're taking, we're, we're doing
that throughout the session.
We're taking responsibilities
that may be used to belong to
the executive branch, uh,
behavioral health, and we're
putting that in the courts,
right, we're doing competency,
we're putting that in the
courts. We're taking CFD and
we're taking that out of the
governor's authority will put
that into the attorney General's
story. I, I, I'm concerned that
sometimes we're
restructuring in the government
because of, of the problems that
we have right now with the
people that are there doing this
thing rather than do we really
need to reorganize government to
deal with the shortcomings
present before us rather than
recognize that those
shortcomings will pass when
perhaps um other people are
responsible for doing these
things with a different
attitude, so, um, I, I, I know
that, that some thinking is this
bill we shouldn't spend too much
time on or worry about because
the governor will likely veto
it, um, and
I don't wanna be that
presumptuous that that she's not
wanting to be constructive as
well too, so I, I'm gonna
suggest first of all, is an
amendment that we strike the in
subsection A, the second
sentence, I'll wait to see
whether anyone wants to join in
that, but that's the language
that would say an employees
failing to comply.
So, and when it goes on to say
may constitute grounds for the
the committee you all are a
little bit new to me perhaps
over here anytime a law says
something may happen, like
usually say that belongs in a
memorial, um, because
Yeah, so it's, if you do this,
you may be uh immediately
terminated, but also says, um,
maybe or maybe not, right? So,
uh, to me, that's almost
meaningless and so I won't get
too hung up about it because
it's not really law to me when
you say something may happen or
may not happen.
It's kind of like whatever, but
um as a lawyer, it matters a lot
to put words in our statues in
our books and then just say, uh.
Maybe we'll do this, maybe we
won't, so I, I, you know, I
would just suggest that we, that
we move ahead with this try to
clean up the map as best we can
see, uh, I'll respond. I'll wait
for your response.
Chair committee, um, we, we
would accept that as a friendly
amendment.
All right, I'll go ahead and
make it if it's uh instructive
to you any discussion on that
amendment.
Uh, so Emily, it would be in
subsection A on the first page,
uh, striking with the language
that reads an employee's failure
to comply with the provisions of
this subsection may constitute
grounds for immediate
termination of employment goes
on from there, OK?
And, and I think Senator raised
the point. We do have an
analysis that suggested that
this would fly in the face of
collective bargaining agreements
and I saw some heads nodding in
the audience who probably
familiar with those collective
bargaining agreements and I've
negotiated some of those in the
past, so it's pretty hard to
immediately terminate somebody,
um, and so I think that this is
probably
wouldn't be enforceable anyway.
So anyway, we're on that
amendment. Is there any
objection to the amendment?
All right, the sponsors say it's
fine, so that movement is
adopted, uh, I believe that's
all I, oh, I know, I did have
one other question on page two.
your bill would require
retention for 24 years. How'd
you pick 24 years?
Go down to 7.
Same question's gonna apply. I
gotta tell you,
this is the kind of stuff that
always gets my attention, so we
had the strategic water reserve.
Remember that we needed a half a
billion dollars for that, then
we needed $150 million for that,
then we needed $70 million for
that. Now we need $40 million
for that. When I hear things
that kind of floating all over
the place kind of makes me
think, um, you know, what's
going on here? So why was it 24
years now if it was a 24 7's
fine, or we just put on darts at
the wall.
No, uh, committee, this was
after.
uh conversations would do it and
their capacity and what seemed
reasonable in terms of their uh
expertise in this area. OK,
good. There's some logic. All
right, so sometimes this point,
this time of the session the
logic seems to go out the door
sometimes.
Yeah, uh, that's it. I've got
it. I'm done, my scope. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Since it's
amended, it has to go back, um,
you could look on the.
On page one.
Line 23 after the period.
Like, I propose we say um
employees of the department.
shall not erase data.
From the electronic devices
issued by the department.
Just to give a little, I mean,
it's only an hour, but just to
give it a little extra oomph.
Would, would that be a friendly?
Mr. Chair committee, um, when
can you repeat that and then um
and then yes, we would um see
that as a friendly amendment.
Thank you. Uh, I'll just model
it after line 20 employees of
the department shall not erase
data.
From the electronic devices
issued by the department.
Instructors.
Uh, yes, that's constructive.
Thank you, chair, so moved.
OK.
As amended
Is there any objection to do or
do we have a DuP pass motion as
amended with the amendments. All
right, Senator, right, any
objections to do pass motion,
seeing them with the amendments.
Here we have.
See.
Thank you. Thanks for coming
over to see us.
Um,
and Reid.
Houses 102.
Yeah
Mhm.
Yeah
Do you know anybody,
uh, Ribson Reed, welcome. We
don't have anyone who's
registered in support or
opposition to your bill, so go
ahead and we, we shouldn't need
too much time with you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, I want to
also introduce Johanna Cox.
She's a an attorney and also a
prosecutor who's dealt with this
issue, but basically what um how
102 does is it's try to remedy
an issue from um a New Mexico
Supreme Court case stateano that
came out and in 2016 homicide by
Vehicle.
I was a 3rd degree felony,
whether committed by a DWI or
reckless and the legislature at
that time enumerated it as a a
discretionary serious violent
offense in the uh notorious
Deduction Act, um, in 2016, the
legislator made DWA homicide and
reckless driving homicides
separate offenses and raised the
DWI to a second degree felony
and left reckless driving as a
third-degree felony. However,
the legislature made no changes
to the um good time serious
violence.
Act, and the result is that
under the unambiguous plain
language of the MEMDA, the
sentencing court may treat
reckless driving, homicide as a
serious violent offense, meaning
that that defendant can earn a
maximum of 4 days per month of
good time deduction, but on the
other hand, if you are a DWI
homicide, which is considered a
nonviolent offense, that is
actually a higher degree than
the 3rd degree felony and it was
left out of being changed, um.
In that section 0, which is the,
I call the catch-all, uh, but
the discretionary good time
offenses. And so with that, with
this bill would do, would
basically remedy, um, the
homicide by vehicle or great
bodily harm by a vehicle of
potential serious violent
offenses, and it would remedy
that issue making it
discretionary, um, and the court
case specifically said that um
it didn't seem right that it, it
came out this way but the
legislature clearly intended um
that you would have to intend to
put it into that section. So
it's just something that we're
trying to correct based on, I
think something that the
legislator made a mistake on him
with that for questions. We
don't make mistakes, but you
know,
we don't have anyone who did you
have anything down.
No, Mr. Chair. All right, thank
you. So we don't have one,
anyone registered in support or
opposition so members of the
committee.
the committee your questions.
The my. Thank, thank you so
much, Mr. Chairman and thank
you. Thank you for working on
this issue, the, uh, OK, so
refresh our memory, so
A serious violent offense on
page 7 subparagraph 4. So
serious violent offense.
A through M.
is
15% potential good time and then
paragraph O is up to the court
at sentencing.
Yes, Mr. Chair and Senator, it's
the discretionary act, so by
just moving um taking out that,
uh, on page 9, on line 14, um,
making it homicide by vehicle or
great bodily harm by vehicle. It
just gives both of them in that
discretionary category, so we
don't just have reckless when we
have DWI as a second, so it just
doesn't fit, thank you, Mr.
Chairman Representative Ree Cox,
I'm torn because we, that was a
huge error.
The statute wasn't an error, the
policy was in error.
to the family, it doesn't matter
if the person's drunk or the
person's sober, their, their
family members killed in a car
wreck.
Uh, that was, that was reckless,
reckless or intoxication.
Um
But we separated DWI homicide
and somehow that's a greater
harm, um.
I think blowing through a red
light, doing 80 is a greater
harm.
Um
But, um, but, but that was the,
that was the bill that was done
at 3 in the morning a couple
years back.
Um, and the arguments you're
making now, no one, no one
believed me at the time. Um,
But I don't know if I, uh,
Even though the crime is
determined is horribly, horribly
awful.
The person may not be.
prone to violence, um, and so
that would be, you think that
would be a sentencing issue?
Yes, um, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Senator, so it's still, if
you're convicted of whether it's
reckless homicide by vehicle
with great bodily harm, um, or
homicide by vehicle DWI, the
judge will still have to make
those findings and it's a
serious violent offense
factually and make that, um, I
think that exact language um in
that is.
probably, you probably have it.
I'll just defer to my expert.
She probably has it right there.
It's discretionary.
It's not mandatory.
Uh, motion.
that are doing. Any other
discussion? Any objection?
really do best. Cox, thank you.
Um, give me just a second here.
We're probably gonna hear up
next.
The House built 255, but I don't
know what's um.
Me, are you presenting that
yeah.
OK, would you cheer for a
moment.
Go ahead, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members, um, House Bill 255
was originally drafted by the
Sentencing Commission
unanimously supported by the
Sentencing Commission. It had
worked on this legislation
during the interim and looking
over our um
Uh, delinquency Act made some
marvelous changes to the wording
of the act, in particular,
there's funds available, uh,
somewhere to the tune of 5.5
million and those funds,
however, those funds can only be
used to treat uh an adjudicated
delinquent, an adjudicated
delinquent, uh, I'm looking on
page 17, as you know, Madam
Chair is basically uh youthful
offender that has been found
guilty. It's just the
terminology of the juvenile, of
the children's code.
So we want to change the magic
words adjudicated delinquent to
children or youth, the house
actually modified it and so now
it's delinquent children or
youthful offenders subject to
the juvenile sanctions, in other
words, capturing everybody in
that system or children or youth
referred by the department, we
created a definition for youth
which is person's 26 or under
26. So we can utilize these
funds that go to all these
wonderful uh nonprofit
organizations that are doing
fantastic work. That was the
precipice of the bill.
And that was the bill as
introduced by the Sentencing
Commission.
Uh, that I, that I, that I, uh,
chose to sponsor. The bill,
however, took on a life of its
own and added a section 12 as
well as uh 4 other sections.
Um, so we have an amendment that
I wish to to speak about.
So I'll move the amendment for
our discussion, uh, Madam Chair,
if I may. And, uh, we do have
people signed up in supporting
opposition. Do you want to do
your amendments first before we
touch on the, I have 2 here, uh,
24 4. OK. If I could get a copy
of the point.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
the amendment, um,
Although Section 12 is, is
I, uh, you know, bold and
forward thinking, it, it wasn't
uh
It wasn't uh, there wasn't a
community conversation in the
state with regards to, to doing
that. It, it offers um
Uh
Per diem to, to, to youth who
have gone through horrible,
horrible times and, and, and
been incarcerated.
And folks back home, you'd have
to explain that policy to them.
I think we can do that policy
once the state is comfortable
with that. But anyway, what the
amendment does is does
Uh, primarily strikes section
12, so it strikes the many
concerns we've been hearing
about this past month.
Uh, with regards to the
stipends.
Um
And it also does some cleanup
language in particular with
regards to sentencing, it gives
the judge's discretion, uh, uh,
up to
Up to, uh, you know, 99 months
jail up to 21 months jail, so
that the juvenile court has
discretion over sentencing and
gives them more tools to uh to
punish and rehabilitate, um.
These young people who've gotten
into trouble with
But that was down to questions.
So, thank you, Senator. So
before we, before we get to go
to discussion on the, the
amendments, uh, we have 2 people
signed up, one in support, one
in opposition, Nick Costales and
support. Go ahead, come on up
and uh you can go for, uh, limit
your home to about 2 minutes,
please. Then Denali Wilson.
I will be in opposition on this
one.
Bye. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Nick Costales. I think
this bill is a good, um, first
step moving forward, I think it
has a nice balance of both uh
rewards and incentives for
youth, uh, to work their
program, work their
rehabilitation, but it also has
an accountability piece that's
built into that as well. And
then, of course, the part that
uh center myste was talking
about the juvenile community
corrections fund that's been a
big missing piece for you.
for years and, and this will get
the money further upstream, not
having to wait is the center of
my just uh talked about to
formally on probation, but
instead of being able to get
these to you that are not even
touching the system yet or have
just started to touch the
system.
So all around I think it's a
good first step, um, that will
really go to our efforts of
improving public safety as well
as supporting these youth to get
them on the trajectory other
than the ones that we see in.
Thank you.
Thank you, Denali Wilson. That's
2 minutes.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Denali
Wilson. I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico and the
ACLU stands in opposition to HB
255, uh, in its current form,
I'm um looking forward to seeing
what changes and discussion
there's more um um the
amendments, but particularly we
want to raise concerns about
section one of the HJC
substitute, which expands the
use of adult sentencing for
youth. The provision
is not only counterproductive to
public safety, but also harmful
to youth. True accountability
for harm comes from changed
behavior and from preventing
future violence, and this cannot
be achieved by exposing children
who cause harm themselves to the
dangers of adult incarceration.
Research overwhelmingly shows
that prosecuting youth as adults
does not prevent, but drives
violence by increasing trauma
and denying young people access
to services that they need to
succeed.
If our goal here is to reduce
youth violence and create safe
and healthy communities for
young people. We must reject
ineffective policies that
instead and instead invest in
evidence-based solutions that
prioritize safety and
rehabilitation. Thank you.
Thank you. That's all we had
signed up, so where's, there's
something.
That, that was.
Oh, it sounds like there was
someone else who had signed up
to
like just wasn't on the list,
um.
Come on now.
Go ahead for up to 2 months.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
Committee members. My name is
Ramona Martinez. I am a former
juvenile defense attorney, and I
am also a member of the
sentencing commission. I'm here
to express my strong concerns
about 255 because it's not the
product of a fair, transparent
process. As a member of the
sentencing commission, I can say
with certainty that this was not
what we agreed upon, nor were we
were, nor was the commission or
the juvenile committee uh
meaningfully, um, consulted on
these changes.
The Sentencing commission exists
to bring together representation
from various constituencies to
evaluate policies and
legislation. This process has
consistency has consistently led
to thoughtful compromises that
strengthen our justice system.
It has long been our practice to
receive notice of proposed
legislation engaged to face to
face discussions and evaluate
concerns from multiple
viewpoints were and before
reaching a consensus. That did
not happen here. What began as a
very well intended bill to
expand services to juveniles,
um, we now have the bill that's
in front of you.
Um, Mr. Chair, you consistently
ask for the commission's
analysis for good reason,
because it sound because sound
policy is built on expertise,
research, and broad stakeholder
input.
Policies changes of this
magnitude required careful
consideration. We risk
unintended consequences that
could weaken, not improve our
our juvenile system. For
example, while expanding
commitments may sound appealing
in theory, that same language in
this bill could lead to
juveniles being released earlier
than than intended under their
provisions. Why, I understand
very well the realities of
legislative negotiations,
transparency and accountability.
must be remain at the forefront.
I respectfully urge you to
consider this reconsider this
bill in its current form and um
seek consultation from the
juvenile from the sentencing
commission. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, so we are,
we are on the amendment, uh,
which I think, I believe
Senatorma just moved. I, I think
we're done with, with public
comments there might have been
one more.
And I'm sure. So uh I have two
amendments, do I know?
if I may,
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I, I
chose to pass out the 0.4
version 2 were typed up, but in
the final negotiations the.4 is
the one that was agreed upon by
uh by leadership and, and we
want to maintain the integrity
of what the House did with the
exception of Section 12.
So before you, before you get
any um thank you further
senator. So we've got a 3.3 and
they've got a 3.4. Are you
telling me that we should
disregard the 3.3 and focus only
on the 3.4, right, so I, I just
don't want to be confused, so
I'm gonna put aside the 3.3 and
we're looking at 3.4 is the
motion for us. All right, thank
you.
All right, so, so we're on the
the 4,
discussion on the amendment.
I.
I
Go ahead,
to respond.
For sure.
Uh, so, um, Madam Chair, uh,
senator, I would just like a
general explanation of the
amendments if we're not going
through them line by line, if
you could explain to me what the
purposes of the emerg thank you
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Stewart.
So if we go up,
Let me just go through and make
sure they're correct.
OK, great. So,
So line one
Deletes the uh title on the top
of page 2, and that's the title
with regards to the the
stipends.
And then let's go to page 10,
Madam Chair.
And, and this is the uh Senator
Cervantes I'm sure a point of
privilege, so Senator describing
changing the title, but the
point forward version does not
change the title.
So, I, I'm still trying to track
what you're telling me, but
you're describing a different
amendment than the one you
forgive me, it does, Mr. Madam
Chair, if you look on page 2,
I'll just go line by line. I'll
if we turn to page 2.
um, the
The, the First Amendment is on
page 2 line 1.
After the word child place a
sentence.
And delete the remainder of line
one through line 7. So we're
erasing that portion of the
title which referenced the
stipends in section 12.
And then if you can go to page
10 chair Senator Stewart. This
is the crux of the, of the
amendments that were.
After speaking with uh
After speaking with uh
As many folks as I could,
including a Senator Lopez. So
right now, the judge has two
choices.
They can do
You know, a short-term
commitment is 9 months jail, 3
months probation with the
Senate, with the House
amendment, it's 9 months jail, 6
months probation, or a long-term
commitment 27 months, 6 months
probation, and so the words
under current law is no more
than, no more than we want to
change those words to up to.
So that the judge has discretion
with regards to, so it's not 9
months jail, it's 0 to 9, it's
not 21 months jail, it's 0 to 21
with the 6 months probation
following. So that's the main
amendment that, that, uh,
That was done and then on page
20 it's more style on page 20 of
the house did actually a a
wonderful uh amendment to the
original bill with regards to
applications for funding.
And they put uh that that
section one on 9/11 shall be
given first priority, 2nd
priority, 3rd party. We want to
take away the shall be given
first priority shall be given
second priority and just list
those programs so that the, uh,
so that the grants can go to
these programs as opposed to
In tear of of eligibility.
And then, of course, uh,
16, uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Stewart, 16, erases uh or, or
strikes rather, Section 12,
which is the, the stipend.
Uh, thank you for that. So, the
stipends you to taking out all
of section 12, and that's the
pilot.
What,
what are we talking about on
page 20? What are they applying
for? What funds are these? Thank
you so much, Madam Chair, um,
Senator Stewart, so this is the,
it's currently it's called the
the uh juvenile Corrections Fund
were just for the fun of it,
we're changing it to the
juvenile community connections
fund and the connections fund is
that 5.5 million that I spoke of
that goes to
Adjudicated delinquents. We
wanted to go to all young people
that are struggling in these
systems and so the house put in
uh that paragraph on page 20.
And, uh, and so the grants uh
from this fund shall be awarded
to programs focused on
decreasing violence, gun
violence, alcohol, substance
abuse, it just, it just lists
what programs the grantor is
seeking when when uh building up
the $5.5 million. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Early discussion on the
amendment.
Um, I'm sure on the amendment,
um, I heard.
Uh, from the sentencing
commission, I want to make sure
it was the sentencing commission
like her opposition, but like
was the was the opposition uh
position taken by the commission
itself.
The
Or the commission.
as a member of the commission,
right, and, and
Now granted,
in all fairness out of the room
the commission endorsed the the
original bill.
But I've been in touch with a
couple of commission members in
the interim or since that time,
yeah, and and what I'm trying to
establish is what get them so I
think I understand it has to be
the, the opposition made with
reference to the sentencing
commission was an individual of
the sentence commission, not by
the sentencing commission as a
group, is that right? OK. And,
and, um, and I'm not sure
because she was just
Oh, just.
squirted out of the room. Uh, I
wanted to know whether her
position was mindful of the
amendment or not, but I guess I
really can't ask for that. Thank
you, man. Additional discussion
on the amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment?
See that that's adopted, or on
the bills as amended.
Members of the committee.
Letterworth.
overdue pass is demanded.
Senator Paul, where you uh
reaching to do something there.
All right. Uh, any additional
discussion before we go to that,
take that motion?
All right. Is there uh any
objection to?
To, right, then let's do a local
vote.
No.
to
O'Malley.
In her post.
Understood and our work.
Yes.
And you're doing
Yes.
Yes.
Mhm
You have do pass.
Thank you.
That
Uh, let's see, probably, give me
just a second here.
Garcia
Bill 24.
No.
Thank you, Chairman, members of
the committee,
uh, Mr. Chair, the House
Judiciary
Substitute for House Bill 24
makes some streamlining changes
to our.
Community governance attorney
Act.
Established in 2020 as a tuition
waiver program for 3rd year UNM
school of law students.
To engage or
this is about attorneys.
To, to engage in uh
Uh, in providing free legal
services to our uh Spanish land
grant Asea and colonial
communities. Uh, Mr. Chair,
since 2020, our community
governance attorney program has
gone through several growing
pains.
And uh as chair, these growing
pains will be resolved in our
House Judiciary, which is a
collaboration by the community
governance Attorney commission,
the UNM School of Law, and the
higher ed department, and Mister
Chair, I'd like to yield to my
expert who will briefly share
with you the necessary changes
to our community governance
attorney program, and he's
filling in for uh uh my primary
uh expert who was Adrian
Oglesby, uh, from the Uton
Center there at the Union.
a lot.
Thank you very much,
Representative. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee are
Peter Kovac, general counsel
with the Higher Education
Department and also a
commissioner on the uh the
government's attorney
commission, uh.
This act was created in 2020,
and uh has a tuition waiver for
up to 2 um 3rd year law students
paying uh their cost of
attendance, so that's
Excuse me, um, tuition, uh, fees
and uh housing, basically, um,
and the tuition is forgiven if
they spend 2 years providing
services to these 3 community
groups, uh, free of service.
Uh, the
fund that the legislature
approved pages 50% of the salary
for those two years. Um, and
also the
statute created the commission.
Thank you to select students uh
legal students for, uh, service
providers, uh, the commission is
administered by the Aden Center
and Adrian Ozu is the chair of
that commission, and HEB is the
lead uh state agency that
implements it.
Well, so what happened with the
bill as written originally, uh,
a lot of the duties were in sort
of places that didn't exactly
work. So this bill fixes that.
So now the responsibility for
advertising the programs. The
students comes from the UNM
School of Law rather than higher
ed department. We're less
connected to the students,
obviously, uh, administer
administering contracts for the
legal services would change from
the commission to the law
school.
I'm, I'm feel like I'm
the responsibility for
selecting students administrate
the program would change from
the department to the
commission. The definition of
eligible legal services, this is
a big change would be extended
the agencies and counties and
municipalities that have
colonias within their borders
and removes the 50%.
Uh, the, the 50%, uh, share is
still there, but it, it's not
prohibited to come can still
come from state moneys, uh,
whereas before in the current
law, it is prohibited. Um, um.
Calculation of starting salaries
would be simplified to change
with the times, uh.
And
With questions. Thank you pass
it back to the representative,
we stand for questions.
I think it represented we didn't
have anybody registered and
support our opposition, so I'll
go directly to members of the
committee.
So do
the pass ocean. Any other
discussion?
Now I think that's a good idea
right now we, we've limited the
salaries to $50,000 in statute,
that means we're constantly
having to keep track of
marketplace salaries and
statures, so I think your way of
doing it is probably a much
better way to do it, which is
kind of tying it to some other
salary structure rather than.
Adjust this every few years to,
to track the salaries, so I
think it's a good idea. Um, I
will support any other questions
or any objection to the Dupas
motion.
represent. Good to see you my
friend.
You're, you're one of the last
of the House members who hasn't
figured out good to come to the
Senate.
The
Uh, let's see here.
Senator Stewart, are you doing
house 6?
Yeah.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I have an
expert today, uh, Kelly
O'Donnell, who's an economist.
And Mark Trujillo.
From
Yes, I B E W. No, the guy just
can't name him.
Uh, so today we bring to you
House Bill 6, it's a very simple
bill.
It essentially uh ensures that
for IRBs.
That we require the prevailing
wage.
It, uh, bill on the last page,
uh, amends the uh
Industrial prevailing wage
benefit rates determined its
part of the um
What's the name of this?
Yeah, public works minimum wage
Act. So on the last page for
projects undertaken under the
auspices of a municipality or
county through the assurance of
an industrial revenue fund,
contractors subcontract employer
person acting as a contractor
shall pay the prevailing wage
and comply with the provisions
of this Act.
So
IRBs or ways we have great
economic development all over
the state, but it's certainly uh
takes away the ability of the
city the county to uh get any
taxes, um, off of the project
for a number of years. Uh, this
just requires that those
contractors subcontracts, etc.
uh pay the prevailing wage. The
prevailing wage is done every
year by the workforce Solutions
on January 1. It's announced and
those
fo lk s that have to do the
prevailing wage of pay attention
to that. And so for any
questions, I'm sure Kelly can
answer or Mark can answer
thoroughly.
And Mark Trujil. So, um, you
want to take a few more minutes.
Do you want to say anything?
was asked to pitch in for Brian
Condit on behalf of Building
Construction Trades Council, so
that's why I'm sitting here
instead of standing there, but
uh IBW 61 is in favor of this
bill.
Um, we feel that
Um
Working people deserve a fair
wage, and this bill will help do
that.
projects.
This term and I will say that
this is not retrospective, if
passed, this would go into place
towards the end of June, it
would be for IRB projects
starting July 1.
And the Madam President, could
you, without trying to test you,
where is the language in here
that would make that clear that
this this has only perspective
application, I guess, I guess
what I'm looking at the only new
language on page 7.
Right. Right.
Yeah, that's how these things
work. You can't go retrospective
as go forward.
Yeah, I'm trying to figure out
what trigger this obligation
because of the, the challenge I
had with this bill on page 7 is
for projects that says reading
under the auspices of a
municipality in Canada. That may
be the right language, I don't
know um whether there's other
language that's used, but I
guess really what I would ask.
Is there, is there anybody from
the city or county who's here?
There's nobody here in
opposition I take it, right, so.
All right. Um, yeah, that's,
that's not entirely clear. I'm
just trying to think of
circumstances where this would
be an issue.
I guess we'll worry about that
if it, if it comes out right to
click the issue would be if
you're doing a project with the
municipality of county, you're
gonna have like a request for
proposals that are gonna go out,
and then you're gonna have a big
day, right? And then you're
gonna have a contract date and
the issue is going to be if, if
there's a project that's out
right now with a request for
proposals, will this apply, um,
if the project's not contracted
until after July 1st, where
maybe be willing to play. We, we
may have some, we may create
some questions about that for
ourselves, but I'm not gonna
worry about it in the city and
counties aren't there.
They, they were in the middle of
a bidding project, but it was a
big project, I would expect them
to be here and ask for some
clarification of the date, so
we'll, we'll work that out as it
comes.
All right. Anyone else
questions, Senator O'Malley and
Senator Ms.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So then my
understanding is it does not um
Uh, it goes into effect July
1st.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I think this
will go into effect the normal
time when there's no date. So I
think that's June 20th. June
20th, yeah, OK.
Uh, also, in terms of you know
vaccine, uh, Kelly O'Dono here,
uh, who would follow up on, on
whether or not uh
Uh the uh recipient was, was,
uh, you know, making sure that
there's a, I mean that the
prevailing wages being adhered
to.
That also that on the workforce
Solutions department
so
I'm sorry, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator the prevailing wage
every year with after a long
process dealing with uh
Different
Projects that have been funded,
etc. and then they're the ones
that are responsible for
ensuring this.
So I'm sorry, it's not county
staff, for example, it would be
OK. All right, thank you.
Oh, thank, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. No, that was my
concern. Do we
We want to put a date to make it
clear or just just June 20.
June 20th works for us. No, I
know, but nobody knows like they
don't, we know it's June 20, but
anyway, that's knows that pays
attention to what we're doing.
It's always 90 days after the
20-day period, so, you know,
we're not doing it on any other
pills.
Well, we do it on rings, but I
understand. No, no worries, no
worries.
Anyone else
got a new amendment came here
Yeah
well
I appreciate the interesting
discussion, but I, I do think, I
think the, the point's not
completely lost on me because
again, we're talking about
construction projects, right?
construction projects having
been an architect, uh, in my
former life, they're, they're
progression, right? So you may
have, as I said, you may have a
request for proposals and then
there may be a bid date and all
those kind of things so the the
the day.
of the contract in relation to
the law, I think would have
some, some interesting um uh
issues, but it knows it becomes
effective 90 days later, if
you're in the middle of a
process, if you're in the middle
of bidding or, or getting
proposals, but again, without
the city and county here, I'm
gonna assume it's not a problem,
uh, and if they were, it was
probably be here saying, hey,
we're in the middle of bidding a
project. We're in the middle of
putting a request for proposal
that we, we, we got the, uh,
let's use the airport here in
Santa Fe and works worked on
really hard for a long time.
That's a project that was
took 4 years and still it's
supposed to last a year, right?
It took 4 years, and now and
still going, so this is the
nature of construction. They
kind of come and come and go,
but again, they were, they were
concerned they'd be here, so,
um, I don't have any other
questions. Anyone else?
All right. Uh, there's a do pass
motion, yes,
Milly, is there any objection?
There's no you do pass that.
How's 6.
Do we have anybody here for
house 346.
I have, I have an amendment
coming down from LCS on that.
Could we there's here for it, so
we'll hear that in our next
meeting, right? We'll hear 3:46,
we'll roll that over tonight in
the absence of a sponsor.
Uh, well, next year, Hospital
64.
If we have
Grips and Chavez.
And we don't have Matthews I
sent away, but it would be a
while, but
We need sponsors and we don't
have any. So that will do it for
tonight. We'll, um, I'm just,
I'm kidding.
Take it easy. Take it easy.
Wait
Yeah
Representative Chavez helps Bill
64, um, we have registered to
support our opposition.
Representative, we've lost the
number of members of our
committee tonight because of the
other demands on us, so we'll,
we'll hear 64, please prepare
your presentation within 10
minutes. We don't have anyone
registered in opposition at this
time. So you can recognize as
many speakers as you want,
whoever you want to recognize.
I'm gonna leave it up to you to
decide how much time each one of
them speaks, but that 10 minutes
will conclude the presentation,
right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um House
Bill 64 would amend the state's
non-discrimination and tuition
equity law passed in 2005 to
allow adulterant workers and
taxpayers access to in-state
tuition and financial aid for
credit and non-credit training
programs at community colleges.
New Mexico's current tuition
equity law for young immigrants.
Out of breath
known as dreamers relies on
middle or high school attendance
for one for one year for
eligibility. This bill would
extend eligibility to immigrant
New Mexicans who have attended
adult educations and programs in
New Mexico for a year.
Worked in the state and filed
New Mexico income tax returns
for at least 2 years, or it
would also extend eligibility to
young New Mexicans who are
applying for special immigrant
juvenile status.
These new criteria align with
the state's existing residency
requirements for tuition
benefits. Ultimately this is a
workforce development bill. Many
immigrant New Mexican workers
aspire to jobs in healthcare
HVAC, welding, broadband, and
other skilled traits, but
because they are apparently
excluded from reduced tuition
rates and tuition support, the
cost of credit and non-credit
career and technical education
and certificate programs remains
a significant barrier.
House Bill 64 removes a key
financial obstacle and provides
hardworking New Mexicans with a
fair chance to gain the skills
they need to fill jobs in high
demand industries. This bill is
a win-win. It will help these
New Mexicans get better jobs and
it will help New Mexico fill
them. Mr. Chair, I have uh two
experts with me, Marcela Diaz,
executive director of Somos um
Polo Unido and Gabriela Ibanez
Guzman, the staff attorney at
Somos, and with that we stand
for questions.
Thank you. And we don't have uh
any speakers we want to get to
the discussion on right, very
good. We'll go then to the
committee members' questions by
committee members. Anyone?
Any discussion?
Well, who has a do pass motion,
very timid motion
I didn't wanna get in the way of
anybody saying anything else, so
thank you, Mr. Chair. I move to
pass.
So
any other discussion?
Is there any objection to the
new pass motion. Signon
represent of Du Pasir.
Cool thanks here.
The last matter we have for
tonight is going to be House
Bill 243, Interstate Medical
licensure.
We got all the bills?
00.
Representative Romero, 346, we
were.
We were looking for you a bit
ago.
Um, all right, we'll try, we've
got you on the agenda, so we'll,
we'll hear. Are we still wait
for amendments?
are, Mr. Chair, and I told them
they could take the rush off
because it had been rolled, so
that might have set us back a
bit, why don't we do this? Why
don't you ask them to get back
to work on it and we'll go on to
the compact. here we go. So
we've got another bill that's
gonna probably, I think, take at
least 30 minutes, maybe a little
bit longer. It's just some place
we can call for you?
Yes
Where will you be at?
Here we were.
OK, we'll, we'll keep you back
over there, um, and we'll, we'll
call for you. We're waiting on
some amendments that are doings
been working on, so we'll see
what we get done, OK?
Represent Matthews 2:43.
Yes, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. uh,
chair.
Um
oriented here a little bit.
Uh, we, uh, we heard this bill
previously. I'm not gonna go
back out into the audience again
for public comment. We've
already done that.
There are some amendments that I
know that are doing has
proposed, and so I'm gonna first
recognize her. I, I trust you've
either received the amendments
or been consulted with that, or
else we take it slow enough, you
can follow along if you so
Senator, maybe you can tell us
you've got amendments and have
they been provided yet to the
House sponsor. Mr. Chair, after
our last meeting, someone from
Think New Mexico asked for asked
for my amendments which were
just written in the bill, so I
gave him a copy of the bill with
my notes.
And Representative, do you have
these amendments?
Mr. Chair, I have the amendments
that we prepared in response to
a rep uh Senator Do Higgs
comments, um,
It, it's not all of this
amendments that she asked for,
but it is a 1413, I'm sorry, 13
amendments, and I submitted
those to the committee
yesterday.
What is the footer number on
your amendments,
um 0.232098.1.
I think
oh, I'm sorry.
Right.
0.232056.1.
OK, so we've got um I've got
98.1 in my hands, and there's
the 5 6.1
um is there a motion center
doing to.
Adopt amendments with a further
98.1 for sake of discussion
purposes.
All right, so for discussion
purposes, the motion before us
is to amend House Bill 243 with.
Amendment will pass out to
committee members now it's gonna
be 98.1.
Mr. Chair, uh, we do have an
expert, uh, Rick Masters, who
was a special uh the general
counsel.
Um, as a compact, and he's
available on too.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
you can call in him as you need
him to answer any questions that
are directed to you, all right,
by the committee members. So
Senator Doug, you have moved as
an amendment for a sacred
discussion purposes has House
Bill 243. This is quarter 098.1,
so do you have the floor while
that a minute. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. So this amendment is the
same thing that I went through
uh in our last meeting on this
bill, with, with one edition,
um, which is what we were, we're
having this discussion.
last time, uh, I like, uh, the,
the expert who was here made a
comment of, well, I guess, I
guess you could, we could submit
this to the commissioner and you
would be instantly in default
because of the differences in
the language.
Um, and being in default has all
sorts of repercussions, um,
under this compact, so I
amendment number 18.
Ads on page 28, line 2 after the
period.
That language of the
interstatement of the Interstate
Medical licenser Compact,
adopted by New Mexico that
differs from that of other
member states, shall not
constitute grounds for default.
Otherwise, um,
This, this is what we discussed
last night. Now, Mr. Chair, I
will say,
That's having this drafted.
I realized I missed a couple of
things, so if we could deal with
this amendment first, but then
I'm gonna have a couple more
verbal ones
so we're we're considering your
proposed movement right now as a
threat, right? We'll do that
first and then I know you may
have some additional members and
I probably have some as well
too, but right now we're on
yours and we're looking at
paragraph 18, which, as I said,
it is an additional paragraph
from your earlier moments and um
everything that follows after
that paragraph 8 will also be
here.
No, Mr. Hare, so 18 is the only
one.
in here that's new. Everything
else in this amendment before us
is what we discussed, what I, I
went through last time.
Other than some cross changing
some numbers that were like the
article numbers changed little
things like that.
All right.
Representative, are you with us?
Representative, I'm sorry,
you're still looking for where,
where I was, my question was
directed to you, do you, are you
following where we're at?
Uh,
Mr. Chair, yes, we have.
The amendment that we proposed,
which includes some of the
amendment uh in 232098.1, but
2, 32098.1 is not a friendly
amendment.
Not a friendly amendment. And
then I understand you, you'll
have some amendments perhaps
after that instead of doing the
amendments and some moves. We're
gonna be here a long time
tonight, so get ready and get
settled up. Um, the sponsor, uh,
we're looking at paragraph 18 on
98.1, the sponsor says that's an
unfavorable amendment is there
other discussion on the proposed
amendment.
And that's true, I just want to
make clear we're talking about
the whole amendment here
and I think
this is the only paragraph 18 is
the only thing that's new from
your early amendment, right? So
I'm focusing our attention.
We've already adopted your
earlier amendments, so I don't
see a
a need, we, we didn't actually
adopt them we didn't adopt the
earlier. OK, all right, thank
you for the correction that we,
I guess I should say it this
way, we went through them. How's
that? I'm not, I'm not saying it
accurately. We went through
them, but we didn't adopt them.
So, so right, instead of, so we
don't end up
Uh, going back and replowing the
ground and focusing this only on
paragraph 18 of the amendment
that's 56 98.1 and and uh
represent Matthews said that's
not constructive to her, do you
adequately explained to them, I
think, is that right? Any
questions on the amendment that
now is the amendment is a whole
that would include the new
paragraph 18.
That's the motion before us.
Others?
Yes, that's motion, of course.
But
OK.
You're right. We had, we had the
motion was before us previously
for discussion purposes. Now
we're on a motion properly
brought by Senator Doredoption
of the amendment, and the other
discussion on that proposed
amendment.
Uh
Mr. Chair, I, I, I just wanna be
sure I'm clear of what we're
doing. So our
232056.1.
Includes a number of the changes
requested by
Senator Doig, and I'm
And I don't know cause I just
received this.
Whether it looks to me like um
But they
Some of it's the same, but not
all of it. And so,
OK.
Mr.
so after the amendment was
presented at the last meeting,
we had a long meeting with the
general counsel for the
commission. We went through each
of the presented pieces of the
amendment and said which of
these would be such a
substantive change that if we
adopt it, we would not be
allowed to join the interstate
compact, which is the goal of
the bill. And so the amendment
that um Representative Matthews
has the 0.56 are the pieces of
the amendment that's Senator Du
presented that would not put us
in a.
where the compact would not be
valid. So that is why the
amendment from Senator Duha is,
you know, not friendly, and we
have proposed an alternate that
would be friendly, just to
clarify sort of the two pieces
over the motion of course is the
adoption of the amendment, which
is the 98.1, and I understand
you you're the sponsor had said
that that's not a constructive
to you, but that's on the motion
before us that depending on how
we work on that one, we'll go
down to and Matthews, uh,
amendment and if this amendment
goes on,
We'll try and figure out whether
there's any duplication, so we
don't end up with the same
amendment twice, but I don't
even know.
I think our staff could probably
clean that up, um, in the
committee report, so in any
discussion itself on the um
proposed amendment.
Any further discussion?
O'Malley, you're looking at me
with a look that I, I
I haven't known you all that
long, but I was waiting for the
book.
All right. Is there any
objection to the adoption
amendment, Senator O'Malley?
All right. Others in support the
amendment is adopted.
Right. Um, Senator Duke, you
still have the floor and the
center like I'm sorry,
Representative Matthews before I
Get back to sitter Jude who's
got the floor. Did you have
somebody who was gonna move?
Your Amendment 56.1.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, I didn't,
but, uh, we would go ahead and
move it at this point, if that's
appropriate. Mr. Chairman, I'll
move that
I'll move it for purposes of
discussion. I'd like to see it.
Yeah, thank you, Senator
Stewart.
Um
Regrettably, representative, you
can't move something in the
committee that that that you've
got Senator Stewart stepping in
for you, so she's moved your
proposed amendment for
discussion purposes. Again, this
is 56.1, and I think one of the
first questions we're gonna have
to ask ourselves which of these
amendments are already adopted
by Senator Dewey.
Emotion and I think we're all
just gonna need a bunch of eyes
together to do that, so let's
see if we can do it quickly. It
looks like um
The First Amendment on your
tracks hers, is that right? So
that's identical. Let me try. So
yes, uh
Mr. Chair, the 1st 3, I believe,
are exactly the same.
I, I'm sorry, the 1st 2 are
exactly well, no, they're not.
Um, one through.
Want to 5.
1 to 6
slow down. Let's slow down a
second so about not thinking out
loud for a second. Um, why don't
you track and decide which ones
are the same, and Senator doing
all that you do the same.
And then we'll, and then we'll
go back to your amendment
representative C what, if any,
we need to consider outside of
Senator De's already adopted
amendment.
I mean, my understanding is that
um everything in representative
Matthew's amendment was included
in Senator Duhag's amendment, it
just didn't include the parts
that would make the contact
ineffectual.
I'm sorry, you have to repeat
that. I didn't, I, I just, I
thought what you just said was
that everything and represented
Matthew's amendment proposed
before us right now in the, in
the matter before us was already
adopted it andenator Jos is my
understanding, yes.
Um, yeah, and I'm, I'm puzzled
by that because
This may be.
Maybe not necessarily, but if
I'm looking at Representative
Matthew's amendment paragraph
number 2, talks about reing
numbering the succeeding
articles and Senator Do yours
does not have that.
But it is functionally done in
my the the remembering.
OK, and, and paragraph 27 of
your amendment doing says I have
articles, right?
Yes, and they're renumbering
through hour. I think it's just
a different style taken by a
drafter doesn't pair the number
11 on this is different.
On page 26, lines 13 through
strike 13 through 18, that is
not in Senator Doig's.
You know what, I'm, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair. So what mine did was
it struck that entire page. So
they are just taking out a
piece.
that I'm clear, um.
Are you saying that your
amendment subsumes paragraph 11
of Representative Matthew's
Amendment.
Right.
So is there anything else that
members of the committee or
representative or that you're
seeing on your moment that have
not already been addressed in
Senator Deix.
Um, fair.
In terms of our amendment, we go
through the 1st 10.
are the same except for the uh
language about uh renumbering.
And
And yeah, if you're, if you're
ready, um,
And then on
Number 26 on Senator Do Higgs is
the same.
And
Number 13.
On our list.
And number 10.
Number 11 and number 12.
are not on the senator's list,
but are on our list.
Um, and it may be that it's
weak.
We think some of the change, but
not the entire change that she
requested.
So if I can say that again and
maybe a different way. The
paragraphs 1011, and 12 on your
proposed amendment are not part
of Senator De's amendment
expressly that may be contained
within them or subsumed by, by
her amendment. Is that fair?
Uh,
Mr. Chair, I believe that's
correct, um.
But
The difference is is is
substantive.
Hold on, let me think about how
we
might do this, we would that so
effectively we would be
Looking to
A man, the amendment of senator
Dewey with regard to your
paragraphs 1011, and 12, so uh
we would need somebody to move
those perhaps for discussion
purposes, but Senator do go
ahead and be able to suggest how
to do that. Well, so Mr. Chara,
having gone through these.
This amendment functionally
adopts 8 of the amendment 8 of
the
27 amendments.
We just the doctor.
So it's a, there's a
pretty significant difference
between
Um
So 8 of the things we just
adopted would be are included in
this.
Uh
And everything else would not.
All right,
trying to go, I'm trying to
think about how to approach the
challenge we've got here in
front of us. So what I
understand Representative
Matthews to be saying is that on
her proposed amendment, which is
before us now, move for sake of
discussion purposes alone, the
paragraphs 1 through 10 of her
proposed amendment have already
been addressed, right?
They're already in your
amendments senator am I correct?
Yes, yes. All right. And
Representative Matthews has said
that paragraph 13 of our
amendment that's now before us
is a matter before the
committee.
That paragraph 13 of her
proposed amendment is also
within the amendment that you
proposed Senator and we've
adopted, is that right? Yes.
Then I'm hearing you and
Matthews to say her paragraphs
1011, and 12, in her proposed
amendment that's before us,
we're not within your proposed
amendment, and I guess my first
question is, were they were, I
guess if you agree that they're
not within that or we would need
to go back and perhaps amend
your amendment on those three
paragraphs. So, so, so it's
really, it's really paragraph 11
that would be inconsistent.
With the, the event with, with
my amendment. Uh, that's, it's
striking up a portion of page 26
verse m.
construct the entire one. And
so, so, um, you're isolating
paragraph 11. Let me get to that
next. Let me first of all,
dispense with paragraphs 10 and
12, right? So paragraphs 10 and
1210 are doing. First of all,
I'll get you sent me just hold
up, hold on,
uh, so paragraphs 10 and 12 that
are doing are the proposed
limits of Representative
Matthews in 10 and 12. Are they
addressing your amendment
already? Yeah, yes, no, they're,
they're already on. All right,
thanks. I'm, I'm good, I get to
you. All right.
Senator Stewart on just that
question. I'm just, I'm just
focusing on paragraphs 10 and 12
ofresentative Matthews, so I
think the, the difference is
that on Representative Matthews,
uh, she strikes blinds 1 through
3.
And Senator Doig strikes 1
through 25.
26. Yes, on page 25.
6
Uh, yes, page 26.
All right, so let's, let's do
that and that's the paragraph 10
of Representative Matthews's
amendment. So let's focus on
that for a moment and dispense
with that issue with some action
that we uh.
We take up, so we're focusing on
page 26,
if I might, uh, uh, Senator
Doig's number 15.
is the same as our number 10. I
think that's correct.
Mr.
Ja, yes,
because the strike is
is much further, right, sorry.
Yeah, that's where it's 1
through 25 for her, 1 through 3
for you, yeah. Thank you.
So our focus right now is on
riverson Matthews, paragraph 10,
where substantively the big
change, I think, is that
Senators do struck through page
2625. Am I right? And um and
Matthews would have only struck
through line 3.
So effectively we're really
focusing on what his Article 16
and the question then is whether
16 comes or goes. The right
center doing is taking.
out, and Matthews put it back
in.
Um, and so, because Senator
Stewart has moved represent
Matthew's amendment for
discussion purposes, we're
gonna, we're gonna debate that
one issue for right now, Article
60, so that's the debate for us
on that issue, uh, members of
the committee, anyone?
I do.
So, Mr. Chair, so this is um
this is again saying that that
that allow giving the compact
the ability to uh promulgate
rules that have the effect of
statutory law.
And
Uh, which I think
I think it's a bad idea. Um,
This is an outside entity that
would be, that would now have
the capacity to to
Make laws.
For us here in New Mexico.
Uh, I think that is
There's an abdication of our
lawmaking authority, um, under
our Constitution, we are the
only ones who have the authority
to do that. Now, certainly,
rules in when we give agencies
rulemaking authority.
Those roles to be accepted they
don't conflict with our
statutory laws. Um, get the same
deference as as laws, but this
is specifically saying this has
the same standing as statutory
law.
Um
Which I think arguably would be
more higher standard than what
the rulemaking authority that we
give our agencies now, uh, and
it's still, there's a big
difference between having an
in-state.
Uh, part of state government
making these rules, and an
outside entity that does not
necessarily have New Mexico's,
uh, best interests as their
first priority.
Having having this that kind of
authority.
So I would urge the members to
To keep all of of Article 1616.
A struck.
Uh, I'll let you respond to the
Matthews to that one issue we're
talking about whether we strike
Article 16 on page 26.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
First of all, we do include
striking lines 13 through 18.
On page 26.
Subsection B.
That was later in our list.
No,
All right,
no problem with that.
So the the the difference of
opinion is over subsections A
and C.
Um
The way the interstate
commission works is that if we
join, we will have 2
representatives. We have 2
commissioners, along with every
other state that is a party to
this.
Compact, and there are
Roughly 40 other states that are
uh party to this compact.
It is and
I've gone through it very
carefully and virtually all the
power is in the commissioners.
Um, and so it's in the states
that are the parties to the
compact.
As opposed to being in some
third party.
Um, elsewhere. The the
It
Mr. Masters, who was here and so
forth, they are part of the
staff that is hired by the
Interstate commissioners.
Um, and, um,
So, what we're talking about
throughout this document, this
compact, is the states who are
participating, coming together.
And determining what
How, how the rules are gonna
work, because essentially what's
happening.
Is that
This is a license the
Staff
Runs the licensing of the
doctors for the various states.
Which is, and if you read
through their materials and so
forth, you see that they're
concern is not power within the
state, they're concerned is
having an efficient way to
license doctors in different
jurisdictions, in different
states so that they can practice
medicine in those states. Most
of their work, as you go through
the through the entire compact
has to do the same thing with
the website, has to do with the
ability
To have a coherent, efficient
system to allow doctors to
manage multiple state licenses.
It's about health care.
It's not about power over
states.
Trying to focus very much on
subparagraphs A and C, that
seems to be the area in dispute
I believe 26, so other committee
members with questions I want to
go to Senator Stewart for you,
and then we'll go back to you
but you,
there's, you know, Mr. Chairman,
when we're talking about a, uh,
it's like we, we ignored the
last several sentences, uh,
because it says
Um
Pursuant to the compact shall
have standing as statu are but
shall not override existing
state authority to regulate the
practice of medicine. So, to me,
that statement that took away
some of that sting of uh being
regulated because it says
clearly that not trying to
override state authority.
So, you know, to me it, it, it,
it, it's not that that sentence
uh gives us back the authority
that we think we're losing.
But I'm not an attorney, nobody
listens to me up here.
Thank you. OK, I have next uh
center and then Senator Do
again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative Matthews.
The, um,
So I hear what Senator Doig is
saying. I mean, we would, we
wouldn't just like cough up
regulations of
The, you know, the National
Horse Racing Association or
whatever.
But we're in a predicament that
we need to accept, which is
medical professions have chosen
to be essentially nationally
licensed.
You know, all of these
professions who some have been
around for centuries.
have moved in this direction at
super speed.
And
And that's just the reality of
the situation, so we can
We can hang our hat on.
You know, we're not gonna do
this because
It's weird or, or we're not
gonna.
cough up our, our local
authority, but at what cost?
You know, it comes down to a
policy decision at the end of
the day, and I think, I think
there's a window. I think
there's a window, um.
What was persuasive to me was
chairman of it was when he said
it's like, it's like an
administrative rulemaking. Now
granted.
We have
We, you know, voters in Mexico
can choose the chief executive.
We, we have oversight over those
agencies.
Um, so it is a little different,
I must admit, but what I would
suggest is that we find that
window.
That protects our beliefs as
best as possible while joining
the combat. That, that's my
position. So like, for example,
for example, on page 26 was
chairman.
Thanks 10 and 11.
The, the, the words standing as
statutory law.
I mean, come on, I mean, that's,
that's that jumps off the page.
So, I would suggest we do things
like
Uh, you know, on, on line 10
strike standing as statutory law
and insert in thereof, you know,
the compact shall have, uh, the
equivalent power of a state
agency's rulemaking.
Something to that effect. In
other words, I think there's a
way to craft this which
Alleviates
You know, 70, 90% of our of this
committee's concerns while still
joining the compact cause
If we just say we don't like the
way this is drafted.
Uh, we, we
We can take a principal
position, I suppose, and, and,
and, and not have any licensed
professionals in the state,
cause why would someone move to
a state or continue living in a
state.
If they're unable to acquire
this national license. So I
would, so I
Um
Get as close to that line as
possible and still join the
compact. So I do listen to.
In our store and I, I think
I think our, our apprehensions
are correct and pure, but I
don't think they override the
policy consideration of joining.
Let me, let me, uh, try and
restate the question before us
in a way that I hope will make
more sense of Senator, I'm
sorry, Senator Stewart has moved
for discussion purposes only,
the amendment of proposed by
Representative Matthews her
amendment that would
effectively, because she's
conceded uh or or willingness to
accept a paragraph B so
effectively her amendment, the
way that I'm thinking about it
would be to reinstate
subparagraphs A and C that we've
been struck by Senator Dear. So
that
That's gonna be the issue for us
is the I'm going to treat the
motion as the motion to
reinstate the paragraphs A and C
after doing some emotion in it,
so I'm gonna modify the
discussion a little bit, Senator
Stewart with your permission,
all right?
That's motion before us is
reinstating subparagraph saying
synergy.
So, Mr. Chair, so looking at at
a.
Uh, it says it shall not
override existing.
State authority regulate. I
think that could be read to mean
that whatever we have in place
now.
What could not be overwritten,
but
But it is said that it is frozen
in time. It as to when we, what
is existing when we adopt this.
And that further changes that we
were to make would
To make to the regulation of the
practice of medicine. I would
not necessarily be be given the
same.
Uh, deference that is listed
here. That, that's with A. Um,
I, I, yeah, I really didn't
address C before. I want to talk
a little bit bit about C.
So, and even though the
representatives saying we're
willing to strike B, we kind of
have to look at B to understand
C.
Because right now, she is
saying, uh, the commission shall
be entitled to receive all
service and process in such
proceeding. We don't know what
proceeding it's talking about
with the out.
Um
But, but it also says, so, so
that would have to be addressed
in, in some way. Uh, but what it
also says, uh, when it, when it
was intended to do was any any
lawsuit where there was anything
pertaining to the subject matter
of the compact that may affect
the powers responsibilities for
actions of the interstate
commission, which could be quite
broad, uh, especially with the,
that actions part, the word
there. Um, it says, again, this
is, I think, a violation of the
separation of powers.
Failure to provide that process
will render a judgment of, of
our New Mexico courts, uh, void.
All right.
Well, as to the, the commission.
um, but as to anything about the
commission, the compact, or its
rules. Um, so I think see C is
really a different animal from,
from what we were talking about
with giving this uh
I think extraordinary rulemaking
ability to an outside entity
under A, but even if we, if we
did adopt what you rephrased as,
as a motion to, to put A and C
back in, we would still have to
deal with C because it doesn't
make any sense. We, we have no
idea what proceedings it would
be referring to with the act.
No, Mr. Ja, it's just that I
don't think it's a matter of of
philosophical purity to say we
don't let outside organizations,
make our laws in our state. I
think it is literally our
constitutional duty.
Uh
So I, I don't think this is a
philosophical thing. I think
this is, like, this is our job.
And we would be saying, even
though our constitution says
only we can do it. Nah, this
outside entity.
can too.
All right, so I'm gonna, I'm
gonna continue to state the
motion as I had previously as a
motion to reinstate
subparagraphs A and C, if the,
if the members that I gathered
from the members they wanted to
treat those separately. I would
sever the question before us,
but I'm not hearing that. So
right now I'm hearing it as a,
as a consolidated motion to
reinstate subgray see before us,
you've addressed the issue of
center there anyone else on that
motion was the motion cleared to
the one.
Right,
um, that's the most for us Sara
Stewart. You know, Mister
Chairman, how many other states
do this?
Do like stay up all night long
and do this in judiciary
committee 2 days left in the
session.
How many other states have
accepted all this crappy
language, no offense.
I mean, you know, I, I wanna
make this work, you know, if the
representative is saying, you
know, you take this all out,
it's not gonna work. That's,
that's my concern.
You know, I, I, I do want to
deal with the medical doctor
issue, and this is almost the
only thing before us, so, but,
you know, I know I'm on very
shake shaky grounds over here,
not truly understanding all this
gibberish, um, it, it just seems
to me that it's not as bad as
being made out to be. That's the
way I feel about it.
It reminds this again. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman
Matthews, how many states have
joined this compact?
Um
Mr. Chair and uh Senator uh 43.
And if I could add to that,
One of the questions I asked.
discussed with Mr. Masters when
he was here.
was
How often do they run into
problems and have to enforce
these rules against states.
And
That's not the purpose here.
That's not what they're doing.
They're trying to be sure that
these doctors are in a place
where they can practice.
In multiple states legally and
safely. No, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Rosen
and Matthews. So 43 states have
rubber stamped this crappy leg.
Yes, Mr. Chair.
OK.
Any other discussion?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too want
to make this work. We are
talking about real people who
need help.
Um, and, uh, as I mentioned the
other day, we have this young
family and uh I think they did
it. I know them, uh, it has been
very, very difficult. The son is
very has a very rare form of
cancer. Um, I, it is about
people, really in the end.
And so, I don't want to get
stuck in this. I want this to
have a chance to be accepted.
And so, that's where I'm at.
You said other discussion.
All right, so, as chair, you all
know my practice to go last um
doesn't always mean you're gonna
get off easy, um, because I'm so
I'm looking at the specifics to
for a I'm gonna say what I think
I agree with Senator doing
about, I'm gonna say it a little
differently, face as the
executive legislative and to
focus the judicial branches of
each member state shall enforce
the compact. It means each of
those 43 states at least if the
information is right in 43
states, the Senator has asked
how many states have this
compact. The answer was 43, uh,
4.
3 states don't have this
compact, uh, not the way we're
sending it out because the fact
that we were adopted right now
already has these amendments in
place, right? So with the
amendments we've already
adopted, no states have this
compact, uh, the way we, we, the
way we've got it going right
now.
But, but even if we took it, um,
hook line and sinker as it came
to us, uh 43 states would would
be members, and each one of
their judicial branches would
have the authority to enforce
the compact. It goes and take
all actions necessary and
appropriate to affect, affect
the compact's purposes. One of
the most important um areas of
law that I practiced in
frequently is jurisdiction knows
how to, how do I get, um,
Apollo Global Management,
private equity, uh, to come to
New Mexico and defend the
medical malpractice lawsuit,
that's what I do. And they
inevitably fight me and say, New
Mexico courts have no
jurisdiction because they don't,
they don't operate in New Mexico
and of course they operate with
any number of different
subsidiaries who are in New
Mexico and including Memorial
Medical Center, which has been
run by corporate executives who
are in the C-suite, they're the
CEO and on all of them, they're
not employees in the hospital,
they're actually employees of a
of a subsidiary corporation
called HSC.
PLLC, uh, which is in turn
contracted with, uh, any number
of other subsidiaries and so
forth.
And the reason I go through all
of that torture, uh, process is
because again, they say that New
Mexico has no jurisdiction over
them, um, and that's always a
continuing challenge. So, so
this language would cause me
some uh trouble that, that, uh,
in enforcing this compact, a
doctor in New Mexico could be
subjected to going to any state
in the country who's one of
those 43 states. This language
says if they're a doctor under
this license, the legislative
and judicial branches of, of, of
the judicial.
Right of every member state
shall enforce this.
So it means that um to the
extent that New Mexico or a
doctor here.
would be subject to any actions
under the compact, they could be
hauled into any other member
state. I, I, I don't think any
doctor wants to do that. I don't
think any doctor wants to get
hauled in any other member
state.
For enforcement of the of the
compact. Um
chairs and lines page 26.
Beginning on line 10 through 12.
Um
I'm sorry, 11 through 12, they
make the point that there's
nothing shall override the
existing state authority to
regulate the practice of
medicine.
That would be true that a doctor
with licenses in several states.
would be subject to the
authority in each of those
states.
Um, but certainly within New
Mexico, it is our medical board.
It is our people who are going
to be governing the that
doctor's practice of medicine in
our state.
So it to me.
If there's conflict, it's for
the doctor, it's not for
the doctor practicing in our
state. I mean, he or she may run
into some different rules in
different jurisdictions, but
here they have to follow New
Mexico medical practice and the
state medical board.
Yeah, and, and thank you I
appreciate that and I, I think
the fight would be what is the
practice of medicine, and
believe it or not, that may seem
like that's self-evident, but
that's always a challenge and a
fight for me too as well. So,
the hospital corporate CEOs who
run the hospital and are paid by
another subsidiary corporation,
they'll say they don't practice
medicine.
They're just the CEOs, they're
just the chief operating
officer, they're just the chief
financial officer, they're just
the chief nursing officer,
they'll say, we don't practice
medicine, um, and, and so we're
not subject to the medical
malpractice Act, we're not
subject to jurisdiction. So what
the practice of medicine, my
argument is always in court.
You're the CEO of the hospital.
You're the one who sets the call
schedule. You're the one who
sets the policy procedures and
the CEO will say, I don't
practice medicine. I'm not uh
subject to medical malpractice
claims.
So little terms like what is the
practice of medicine become?
Um,
the other thing that I would
just note too is that sentence
that you just read represents
says the provisions of that
compact and the rules
promulgated, shall have standing
provisions of the contract and
rules can't have standing.
There's really no such thing as
a person or in it can have
standing, but, uh, provisions
cannot have standing, and rules
cannot have standing, so that
language is very poorly written,
um, I respect the other 43
states that may not have had the
same concern that I do, but I, I
couldn't accept that language
and then the subparagraph C.
says the
The commission shall shall be
entitled to receive all service
and process, um.
That's also a fight in my area
of practice, um, who, who got
proper service, when did they
get proper service? Were they
properly served in this, this is
the commission uh can accept
process and have interests and
shall have standing to intervene
in the proceedings for all
purposes. That's what we would
as lawyers call intervention of
rights, um, and that's pretty
broad authority, right? It's to
say that the the commission can
intervene in any case and take a
position, take a side, and, and
that's pretty strong authority
as well too.
So, um, needless to say, I, I
won't support reinstatement of
subparagraphs A and C on this,
that's a motion for a Senator.
briefly, Mr. Chair. So also on
26th, looking at that language
in a that the executive
legislative judicial branches
shall force, but also shall take
all actions necessary, uh, and
appropriate to effectuate the
compact's purposes and intent, I
think one that could that
arguably compels us as a
legislature.
Uh, to, if there was a, if a
compact said, well, we, we need
you to adopt additional laws for
art too.
To effectuate our our purpose
and our intent. Um,
Which I think is
unconstitutional. Um, 2, it also
it said compels the judicial
branches to do so. Uh, but
what's really concerning here is
that then in that next line,
it's saying it only doesn't
override.
Uh, the authority to regulate
the existing state authority to
regulate the practice of
medicine. So if we have a case
in our courts, uh, and there are
multiple issues in it that that
would impact the contact, and
some of them maybe are about
regulating type of medicine, but
some are not. Some are about, I
don't know, contract claims.
There's any number of claims
outside of something around the
regulating the practice of
medicine, that could be
involved, and this would compel
Our courts.
Effectively to rule.
Rule 4 of the compact.
On those issues.
Because the compact.
What what is what would rule.
Not, not any existing state
authority in those areas.
At that position has been
suggested to be removed by the
representative, that's B.
No, no, if this is an A, this is
an egg, this is what we're
talking about putting back in.
OK, we've gone pretty
extensively through one page of
what, what is a what
page, I think so. I'm sorry.
That's all right. I wonder if uh
we could have brickmasters, just
come and give us his insight
because he's the executive
director of this organization
and
And uh
Could perhaps
Throw some light on the
questions.
We'll be here all night
representing so there's not a
question of course, we, we allow
for an expert when there's a
question that you need some help
with if we just allow experts to
pontificate we, we will never
ever leave this building again,
so I was my motion or injection
you really have either one. I
wanted to try to get to a better
Combination of the two
amendments, but I can see that
I'm going to be voted down, so I
don't care about it anymore.
It's just me and you, Moe, maybe
Debby.
So.
Are you withdrawing your motion?
Oh.
Uh,
so we're doing, you still have
the floor.
Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm not even
sure where we are at this point.
Um,
I mean, my, I would, I think we
have already adopted this motion
98.1. I think that is the, those
are the appropriate amendments
for um, oh, you're right. I have
other amendments.
OK, so we'll, we'll move on.
Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
So,
Mr Ta on page 12.
Uh, there's a subsection F,
lines 7 through 10.
Which says that all information
provided to the Interstate
commissioned for distributed by
board members shall be
confidential filed under seal,
and used only for investigatory
or disciplinary matters.
And then look down to lines,
same page, lines 15 and 16,
Liener and disciplinary records
of physicians are deemed
investigative.
So, everything, that means that
everything
All the records are gonna be
about Liener and any
disciplinary action are
automatically.
Made confidential.
Under this.
Um
Which I think is, is
problematic. So I would propose
to strike subsection F.
Lines 7 through 10.
And strike subsection A at lines
15 through 16.
For
12 lines 15 through 16.
In their entirety and re-letter
accordingly. Right, right. Um,
any other, I'll ask you
representative, um, whether it's
that a constructive or not
constructive amendment,
that's not constructive. It's an
unfriendly amendment.
Well,
everybody's ever since I've been
here, I always use the friendly
and unfriendly, and I just want
everybody, I'm trying to change
the, the language around it
because we're all friendly.
We're, we're never anything but
friendly here, but sometimes an
amendment might be deemed by the
sponsor being less constructive
than others, so, uh, anyway,
we'll see how that takes. It may
not work. It's kind of like
people still calling the
Attorney General in the office,
the Department of Justice or
something.
This is a no
is the unconstructive further
sponsored non-constructive
amendment proposed. Uh, is there
any discussion on the proposed
amendment.
Share the concerns, um, and I'll
I'll actually, uh, Senator Doug,
I'll be coming to Article 9 a
little bit. It's really moved to
strike already the entirety of
that article, um, because like
you, um, again, I'm looking at
some of my colleagues who
practice in this area quite a
bit. We do a lot of work with
regard to what New Mexico is
called roya. Uh, it's a review
organization immunity Act, and
so a lot of, a lot of our
dispute discussion is what is
confidential, what is kept out.
So for example, if I'm, if I'm
um trying to take care of a
family who has, um,
brought a medical malpractice
claim, oftentimes we will want
to know what the hospital did in
response to the incident that
led to the a death in my case,
the most case I have coming up
next will be a death case a baby
that died in childbirth. So
we'll want to know what was done
by the hospital in response to
that, the hospital will come
back and say, all of that's
confidential and protected, and
we can't get to it because um
it's protected under this review
in the munity Act, and that
would, I think come within this,
this area of investigative
proceedings and so forth.
And make reports have weighed in
on that statute pretty clearly,
he said, uh, that you can only
deem that to be protected within
that review if it's done
specifically for that review
purposes and oftentimes the
investigation is not done solely
for that purpose. It's done for
that reading purpose and other
reasons too. They're trying to
limit their immunity or their
liability or they're trying to
anticipate a lawsuit, they're
doing a number of things, of
course, in those cases they no,
that's not protected because
it's not just a peer review, um,
so I'm, I'm gonna have real
challenges with all of article.
9 as it is, but right now,
that's not the motion before us
the motion before us is F.
And subsection A on 1516, so any
other discussion on that
amendment. Is there any
objection? There's
Uh, Senator O'Malley objecting
all others in support that
amendment is adopted. Emily, are
you still with me? Yes.
So you start for.
So you start.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I know
we'll come back to that. We had
discussion, um, but
Mr. Cha, I am embarrassed to say
on page 29, I missed striking a
loser pays provision.
page 29, lines 24 and 25.
The prevailing party shall be
awarded all costs of such
litigation, including reasonable
alternatives.
And we struck all the other
loser pays, uh, provisions in
this bill. So this would just be
consistent with the uh amendment
that we've already adopted.
before us is on page 29 and 24
and 25 to strike the sentence of
the complete sentence there
beginning to be prevailing and
including an attorney's fees in
the period the motion, of
course, and work, are you still
with us at page 29, line 24, 25,
Reed attorneys, right? Any other
discussion?
Uh, Matthews that constructive
or not constructive?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that would be
not constructive.
Anyone else on the committee?
I'm going to join, uh, with, uh,
the motion.
Represented by trust, you may
have run into this before over
in the other chamber, but New
Mexico follows the rest of the
country largely, which is the
American rule. We don't follow
the English rule, the American
rule prevail prevailing party
does not get their attorney's
fees as a matter of general
course, um, most often parties
bear their own attorneys' fees.
This would be an exception to
that American rule as opposed to
the English rule, which again
was to protect the king, right?
Uh, from lawsuits, so we don't
have a key.
I think maybe some debate about
that right now, but yeah,
there's some some question, but
uh we we may be moving closer to
monarchy that we would like, um,
and any, the motion forces
strike that sentence. Is there
any objection?
And then that's struck.
We submit.
So do yourself,
that's, that's really all I
have. I kind of going back to
page 12, the, the Roya
discussion.
I think, I think we would, we
would basically have to either
strike all of Article 9.
Or be very careful with C
because I think some of the
language that was added in here,
um, by the representative before
this got to us on that.
I think was not there in the
first place was language that
was put in
To try to ensure that other
states did not like the Texas.
Didn't try to subpoena, uh,
information about reproductive
health providers here.
Um, and so I think that's what
was intended by that language
about the states agreeing.
To the enforceability of of a
subpoena.
Um, and participate in a joint
investigation. If I'm, if I'm
incorrect about that, please
feel free to, to correct me, but
yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
language was added on page 12
and also I think it's on page 14
to protect.
To
So, Mr. Chair, I think it's,
it's almost has to be an all or
nothing approach on that article
because
Because otherwise, I, I, I would
just worry about that
wordsmithing this to address the
really of concern, reopens the
concern that
Other, other states who have
adopted laws that are hostile to
the laws we have adopted here
would be able to
to invade our profits here.
That.
I mean, I guess, I guess the
motion would just be to, to
strike all of Article 9. I
don't, I don't have a more
artful notion, uh, may I?
Yes. And to this discussion, um.
This chair and Senator, um, the
language that was added to this
was added with the consent of
the commission and was based on
guidelines that were developed
by a number of other pro-choice
states, um, as a way to protect
Um, the privacy and
Protect the doctors who were
performing the abortions.
Um, and if this tracts what is
was being used um by the state
of New York and other states as
a way to do that with these
those guidelines would followed
by the commission.
And um
Um, and the, and developed after
a good deal of thought about how
do we best protect.
Um, choice and um
It, I'm not sure why we would
want to change something that's
being used.
And recommended nationally
unless we.
Really thought it would be a
problem for some reason in our
state.
Um, so I just, I, I offer that
because this was done with some
thought and input from many
states.
Mr. yes, I understand that. I
think the issue here is that it
it conflicts with the brain,
that we're fixing one problem
and creating another.
Um
But Mr. Chair, I don't, I mean,
I genuinely don't know.
I mean, there is some stuff in
an Article 9 that I, I would
want to be able to. I mean, I, I
do want New Mexico, if there's,
if there's a doc who would be
able to practice in New Mexico
here, and they have
They have uh allegations or um,
Or they violated.
Uh, practice subjects in other
states. I mean, I would want to
be able to know about that.
Um, so we would be getting rid
of that by striking the the
entire article.
OK.
So, so I guess maybe Mr. Chair,
I, maybe I do not have emotion,
right, right now, cause, because
I, I, I, I don't know how we
would approach that. Uh, while
still preserving the ability.
New Mexico to make sure that we
can look into that bad folks,
if, if need be, uh, without
Getting into royal trouble and
potentially opening folks up to.
Our, our reproductive health
docs uh uh.
Harassment from other states.
No one else before I.
page one by one.
Consider her story, she knows
the drill of going back to the
house days. Um, the
representative of the, uh
Two of my colleagues here were
on the House Judiciary with me,
or maybe no not center words
Senator Stewart was with the
House Judiciary for a long time,
um, if you look on page two of
the bill, this is the definition
section, which is now meant to
be Article One.
I'm not gonna get too picky
tonight, but I'm gonna start out
with it's gonna seem like you to
be a little picky. When we do
definitions, am I, am I not
correct that we don't, don't we
typically uh put a period after
every one of the definitions,
paragraphs, or is that this is
really a question for the draft
here. I don't know Philip or
Brandon or Anna Rebecca might
not write about that when we do,
when we do definitions, if you
look on page 225, don't we
usually put a period at the end
of a definition, or are we doing
this consistently semicolon.
For drafting purposes.
Is it a semicolon? All right,
so, well then, so with that
said, then what gets interesting
to me is you come to page 4.
We have a definition of what is
a position and then you've got a
number of subparagraphs, those
are important for me to kind of
follow on closely if we're gonna
get where I'm going.
Um
So paragraphs subgraphs 1
through 9.
I
completes some page 5, line 12.
You'll see the end there and and
actually up on my night you'll
see and, and then you'll see a
subparagraph 9. Is everybody
kind of following along with me
here. I need to, the sharp eyes.
I mean you got everybody blurry
eyed. I'm looking at the
former educator here, but
it
yeah, yeah, if you're looking
at, um, so the definition of
physician, which I think is
important, how we define a
position for the purposes of
this bill begins on page 4, line
3.
This in the definition section,
you also with me there.
OK, and then, and that begins
with this um paragraphs 1
through 6 on that page, and then
7 through 9 on the next page.
If you go up to my 9, you'll see
a semicolon and the word and.
Which would mean this is a
conjunctive list.
But then look at Senator
Stewart, look at the face. You
got it, right? Uh, if you look
at page, if you look at that
same page line 12, you're in a
line 12 with a semicolon there
as opposed to a period which
wouldn't work, right? And I know
I told you, I warned you
beginning on, it's pretty picky.
You'll have to be pretty
impressed that it's 64 my eyes
are still uh working, but, but
am I right, that's, and I don't
know what the car the only this
reason really curious for me is,
is this a drafting error
upstairs here?
Or is the interstate compact uh
operating with some uh typo and
grammar errors in their, in
their uniform law that 43 other
states missed. I'd hate to think
that would be the case, but we
do need to correct that. I
agree.
Boy, I'm tired too. We could
just take the end down.
We could put 4.
I mean that you'd have to read
each of these to see if every
one of them was part of the
definition.
So
And that's the end, it's real
simple, just the semi-equot
wrong on line 12 and it has to
be a period.
They're really just that simple.
Oh yeah, well, that, that's a
given. I thought you were
looking at the whole
construction of it.
I think to define the position
under this bill, you got to do
all of those. You got to meet
all those criteria 1 through 9.
Yeah, just appeared so
I'll just be curious of
representative, I, I know, I
know you're gonna consider that
a constructive amendment. It has
to be so, like I said, it's
either a type or a grammar
error. The only, like I said,
repeating the only thing that's
interesting to me is this is
where, this is where you know
your uh expert Mr. Masters can
tell us. I'm just, I don't put
him on the spot. either these
errors and and error in 43.
Or somebody made a mistake
upstairs. Um, it doesn't make
any difference to the solution's
the same, right?
So that's got to be a period,
you agree?
There a period.
Thank you.
Uh, on the preceding page, page
41 of the
Components, if you will, in the
definition of a position in
subparagraph 2. I just want to
ask you some, a couple of
questions about lines 11 and 12.
The, the definition of a
physician, I'm sorry, page 4.
9 is a paragraph 2, it says the
definition of a physician is
someone who's passed each
component of the United States
medical licensing exam or a
comprehensive osteopathic
medical licensing exam of the
United States within 3 attempts.
So you get 3 attempts, uh, to,
uh, pass. Well why 3, how many
chances should a doctor get to
fail the exam before we went
out, have them come into New
Mexico, and Y3.
Mr. Chair, I don't know the
answer to that, but I would bet
that Mr. uh
Uh, Masters.
For Mr. Masters. Mr. Masters,
why, why should we let them fail
4 or 5 or 6 times or why should
we let them fail at all?
Why 3?
Oh, Mr. Ma's not.
It should be a 502 area code
phone number.
While we're waiting for Mr.
Masters, I hope you understand
Rep Civic and the question for
us is the, the, the, the, the,
yeah, Mr. Masters, uh, so Mr.
Masters, I hope you've been
following along, have you?
Yes, OK, we're good. Thank you.
I have.
I believe the, the 3 strikes and
you're out came from uh the
federation of state medical
boards. They, they assisted us
in uh
The eligibility criteria that
appear in the compact and uh
Uh, I, I certainly don't have a
problem with uh
An improvement in grammar if
there is such a thing, but
that's, that's where the uh
The 3rd, uh, 3rd attempt came in
and there was also concerned
when we were writing the
compact.
That, uh, we wanted to make sure
that we.
Had, had a bar over which each
position that was going to be
practicing on a multi-state
basis, uh, would, would have,
uh, you know, a higher standard
than perhaps someone who was not
as diligent or not as well
prepared and so I, I think, I
think that was, uh, those were
the primary considerations that
resulted in uh in that third
attempt limitation.
Thank you, Mr. Masters and
Representative, do you know or
if you need to turn to Mr.
Master or any graduates, how
many times does New Mexico allow
an individual to fail their
medical licensing examinations
before uh they disallowed from
practicing medicine. How many,
how many times did you make go
in isolation from the compact.
You get 3 strikes in New Mexico
or more or fewer.
Um, again, Mr. uh, Mr. Chair, I,
I'll ask uh Mr. Masters to
answer that. I don't, I don't
know. I can't remember how many
chances we got at the bar exam,
quite frankly.
I, I, I was gonna say that it
used to be in Kentucky, uh, we
had, we had a 33 strikes rule
with regard to the bar exam and
when I took it, uh, you, you
could only take it 3 times, uh,
and then weren't, uh, weren't
able to be eligible, but I, I,
I, I, I'm not sure other than
the fact we considered what the
Federation of State Medical
Board generally applies uh with
the various uh state practice
acts.
Uh, and that, that was, uh,
consistent with what my
understanding is that what
Uh, physicians required.
Uh, within, uh, within the state
Practice Act.
Right, the reason I'm, I'm, I'm
sure the reason I'm asking is
clear. The goal of this bill, as
I presume, is to bring more
doctors to New Mexico and um I
know from your expert here, this
is I think Mexico initiative
here that we're looking at and,
and their goal is to bring more
doctors to Mexico. I'm sure you
want to bring good doctors to
New Mexico, so the, the question
is, are we raising the standard
or lowering the standards by
this bill? Is is this making it
easier to have a good doctors in
Newexico, or is this making it
easier to have doctors of a
more standard than we already
accept here in New Mexico. I, I
can't answer that without
knowing how many times youexico
already allows you to fail the
examine. It may be, may be able
to fail it infinite number of
times Mr. Chair, if it, if it,
uh, would be helpful, um.
I can check on this tomorrow.
And um if it's a lower number,
um, I wouldn't have, um, we
didn't have a problem with
changing it, if it's too
If it's one, whatever. I, I, I
just don't know that off the top
of my head.
Mr. Chair I'll say, the only
reason it's infinite for the bar
exam is because former Judge Ben
Chavez Senior.
Uh
brought the lawsuit. I think my
dad represented him actually,
suing the bar, uh,
To make that happen, so I would
not assume that just because
it's infinite for um
For, for the bar exam that it
would be infinite for all other
areas.
Thank you. And, and so the, the,
again, this is gonna be me being
as picky as I was with getting a
period right in a semicolon
Rome, um, if you look on page 4
that where I'm looking at right
now, that line 11 and 12,
there's an ambiguity in the in
the in this act because it says
that, again, this is an
important part of the bill to me
because it defines what is a
position, right? And, and who
meets the definition of a
physician. So, so it says you
pass each component of the exam
says within 3 attempts, which is
what I was just referring to.
Then as a comment says or any of
his predecessor examinations
excepted, uh, as an equivalent.
So with that comma and the word
or.
Does that mean that you have the
alternative. Now you can fail it
3 times, and even if you fail it
3 or more times, you can still
qualify as a position by passing
a predecessor exam at any time,
um, or does the or and the three
attempts apply to the failing 3
times of the predecessor
examinations. Do you, do you see
the ambiguity there and I'm
looking at other committee
members to see whether the
ambiguity is clear there. I'm,
I'm not sure what the intent is,
is the, is the intent there that
you, you, you.
You can only fail the United
States medical licensing exam or
the comprehensive osteopathic
medical licensing exam 3 times,
but still qualifies as a
physician if you ever pass any
of the predecessor examinations,
or are you also limited to 3
chances at the predecessor
examinations.
Do you understand the issue that
I have there with that comment
in the word or. I do, but Mr.
Chair, I think that probably the
meaning there is that the
medical exams are updated
periodically, and so when
they're talking about passing up
a predecessor, it's because the
doctor has been in practice and
took the exam.
At a point in time when
Uh, before it was the most
recent update or whatever. I
I, I
Uh
Quite frankly think that the bar
exam I took a very long time ago
is probably no longer the same
bar exam that's given today
because of change in
circumstances, and medicine has
a huge amount of technology
changes and so forth.
Doctors, of course, learned that
through their continuing
education. So, um, I, but I can,
again, I can check on that for
you, um, and if I'm, I'm wrong,
I'll certainly share that
information with you, but I
think it's just because doctors
are taking exams at different
periods of time, and the exams
are updated periodically
to me the question though
remains with me, which is when
we have the qualifier there that
you can only fail 3 times to be
admitted, does that apply to the
current examination.
ordered to pass examinations,
and that's not answered for me
by the, by the bill, but I
won't, I won't hang up on that.
Um, and I would like an answer
to how many times a doctor can
fail and examine in New Mexico
and still be admitted to to
medicine because again, I, I
don't think anybody here would
want to say, we're gonna have a
lesser standard for uh people
under the compact, then we would
as a state, so, um, I appreciate
you being willing to look, look
into that. Um, if you look on
page 30, Article 19, paragraph
3.
This is uh Article 17 is a
dispute resolution dispute
resolution clause.
I'm stumbling dispute resolution
clause.
Uh, this, this provision, uh,
provides for
If you look at subparagraph B,
it says that the commission
shall probably get rules
providing for.
Both mediation and binding
dispute resolution, as
appropriate, and so ambiguous.
There's really no way to, to
know what that means for me. Um,
oftentimes when we have a
dispute resolution clause in any
kind of an agreement, it will
say,
Uh, you have to have mediation
or you have to have arbitration
or um something that's clear,
but here it says you may, it
says you have to have both
mediation and binding dispute
resolution which would be
arbitration really, but it says
as appropriate, as appropriate,
uh, who and why, how, that's
entirely ambiguous.
And then it goes on to say, the
state commission above that and
subur says the commission shall
attempt to resolve disputes
subject to the compact that may
arise among member states or
member boards. I really don't
know that.
We need to
Uh, um, say that because the
commission shall attempt
Um
To resolve disputes that would
seem to be pretty self-evident,
I would think, right, hey, we'd
like you to help us resolve
this. I don't know we need to
put that in the statute, but,
but the more problematic part of
that is her gut being, which
doesn't it doesn't really
Established one way or the
other, whether we're gonna have
an alternative dispute
resolution procedure or not. So
the reason I went back up to a
month ago is I don't think you,
you uh lose anything by striking
article, what is 19, but now
renumbered to be 17 on page 30,
so that would be the article
that begins on page 1, 9:30,
line 1 through 8.
Uh striking all of them.
That or that or representative
they would, they should have
language that very clearly says
binding arbitration, right? Or,
or not, uh, but here it doesn't
really say one or the other, it
says you may have binding
dispute resolution as
appropriate and one party may
say we want binding arbitration,
the other party may say we
don't. That's the way it usually
goes, right? One party wants it
and the other party doesn't want
it, um.
Or or both agree contraction do
so I would just move to a strike
that entire article on page 30.
That's my motion.
Um, sponsor.
constructive or unconstructive?
OK.
unconstructive, um, I think it's
this document is written to some
extent for
Reflecting practices in many
states, and um I think they're
just trying to offer
alternatives.
That would be appropriate in any
particular state, and I also
have the answer to how many
times you can
Take and pass.
The answer is,
Um, an applicant may attempt to
successfully complete any part.
of a board-approved examination,
6 times, as long as the entire
examination is successfully
completed within 7 years from
the date the first step of the
examination is passed, and
that's when the New Mexico
Medical Board.
So. And, and thank you for
giving me the answer. And, and
there's something important
there that I would suggest that
you bring into your bill. I,
I've had to do this as an
architect, as an architect, I
had to do education and then
apprenticeship and then sit for
an examination. And what was
important in what you just read
it was important in licensing as
an architect is you couldn't
keep taking a piece by piece by
piece over 20 years and, and,
you know, you study for one
section of the pastor and past
one section a year and after 20
years, you passed the exam, but
by then, the first section that
you passed.
long since been changed as you
put it out because of the, of
the revisions and the changes,
so there should probably be
something in here you can fail
it over so many times you take
it so many times within a given
period of years, and I don't
like hearing that Mexico allows
you to fail 6 times, uh, and,
and, uh, be in medicine and
again, with the people that in
the room that want to be
bringing doctors and improving
medical care, and I respect what
you're trying to do, and you all
probably heard I've got a
daughter who's a doctor and a
son-in-law who is a doctor. We
want him to do good stuff, um,
but saying you can
failed in New Mexico 6 times
and, and it's, uh, you said over
7 years, is that right?
So, the 7 years is a good,
that's, that's good in New
Mexico. Well this doesn't have
anything like that. Here you can
feel it.
Everybody times you want to take
it over that period of time, up
to 3 times, so there could be
some improvement there, but
that, that, that's going
backwards. I'm still on that uh
dispute resolution provision and
while I appreciate
representative that states may
be wanting to do different
things when we leave it up to
the commission, which is what
we're doing with this section.
We're leaving it up to the
commission to promulgate rules
to decide how disputes are gonna
be resolved. I'm not comfortable
with, with seeing that much
authority to the commission to
decide if, if we're New Mexico
is in dispute and we've used the
example here. We want to get
out. You want to get out of
this.
And the commission says, no,
you're not, uh, and we say,
well, we've got a dispute, and
so we go to the commission and
say we want the commission to
help resolve the dispute where
the commission is the cause of
the dispute, uh, I kind of know
how that's gonna go. And, and,
and then if we say the
commission's gonna uh subject us
to their arbitration, their
dispute resolution provisions.
It's a loaded game, right? No,
there's there's no, no, you guys
would never have a fair
opportunity to, to challenge the
commission. So I, I would strike
all of that article 17 of the
New Mexico a fair opportunity.
In a dispute with the
commission.
Um, I'm sorry, I keep referring
to 17 and 19. It is, it, it in
the original bill is 19 because
we've renumbered, uh, with the
prior amendments, it would now
be 17. That's why I confuse you
all, but, but I should refer to
it by the way it's written in
the bill, so it's, it's online
one through 8 of page 30, I'm
moving to strike that. That's
the discussion before us,
Senator Meister.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Represent. So.
You know, I appreciate that. I,
I understand the reasoning. I, I
agree with the reasoning, but
I'm looking at the, the language
on on subparagraph B.
I said it says the interstate
commission shall promulgate
rules, so they're gonna do that
anyway.
And then when you look at line
2, it says the interstate combat
I'm sorry, the interstate
commission shall attempt upon
the request of the member
states. So we can just choose
not to request it.
Um, so I don't think this
language, um,
And uh
Uh, contradicts, you know, New
Mexico, uh, New Mexico alone.
So if there is more than one
member state involved though,
and so we didn't request it, but
another member state did.
And
they would come in.
And
And assuming that this fighting
dispute resolution.
has appropriate means binding
arbitration, that's also
So elsewhere,
Elsewhere it talks about like
the commission bringing things
to federal court.
The commission could say,
OK, you guys have to do biting.
For, for your dispute that you
have, you have to do by mean
arbitration, but what we wanna
bring a suit, we get to go, we
get to avail ourselves to the
courts. It's not.
It's not equal.
All right, so you set up to
potentially be a people
were some of them. I do have a
question maybe uh your expert,
Mr. Masters can answer, which,
which is the state that is
currently a member of the
compact that has the most
participating physicians, which
state has the most members.
That, that's now participating
in compact state.
Mr. Masters. Are you there?
I, I, I don't have that
information, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker. OK, I, I, I think I was
unmuted, uh.
I, I believe, uh, the state of
Florida, if I'm not mistaken.
All right. And do you have any
idea how many physicians you
have, uh, as compact numbers in
Florida?
I can get that information for
you, but I, I think, uh, because
of the number of physicians that
are licensed there, uh, that,
that makes sense to me. Michigan
is probably a close second.
OK.
And I appreciate that, and I,
and I, I'm not surprised you
don't have that information at
your fingertips. I, it's not a
test here tonight, but uh if, if
we're, if we're hypothetically
in a dispute because this
language says if there's a
dispute between member states.
So we get, we get in this and
New Mexico gets in dispute with
uh Florida, and they've got 10
number of physicians, probably
multiples of 1020, 50 times what
New Mexico is gonna have.
And, and if the commission is
deriving its revenue based on
the number of licenses to each
position that state, the
financial implications to the
commission, who was the deciding
party here, uh, they're gonna
weigh pretty heavily for the
state of Florida, as opposed to
the state of New Mexico. Now
that's, that's not to be, um,
presumptive that they're not
gonna be utterly fair, but if
the commission and I assume the
employees, including Mr. Masters
are driving their income in from
the revenue.
from the member states, I'm
gonna presume that the state of
Florida is going to have quite a
bit more influence just on pure
financial reasons, financial
grounds in the state of New
Mexico just by the number of
participating positions, that's
not meant to be.
In any way accusatory, it's just
I think it's a matter of
finance, right? Uh, and
economics, and that's, that's my
concern. So I think all of those
are, are resolved by striking
that dispute resolution
provision. And so that's that
still remains the motion of
course.
Yeah, I, I, I understand your
concern, Mr. Chair, frankly, we
were just trying to avoid
litigation where possible and
thinking that might be a good
idea and that it's always easier
to pick up the phone and try to
resolve.
You're, uh, problems if you can,
uh, in a, in a personal
interaction that isn't formal.
So that that was all we were
trying to do. I don't think
deleting this.
Is a material deviation, so, uh,
Do what you think's best.
Well, I appreciate that, and
although the sponsor here
suggested it's not constructive.
I appreciate you, uh, being
willing, Mr. Masters, to accept
that, um, amendment, so that's
the matter before us. You want
to reconsider represent masters,
you want to stick with, uh, I'm
sorry, Matthews past master of
Matthews, it's like a rips and
Matthews, you want to stick with
the unconstructive.
Um
Mr.
Chair. Sorry, keep going in to
say speaker, uh, um, Mr. Chair,
I, I'll discuss it with Mr.
Masters, but um,
You know, it's they're compact
and if they're fine taking it
out. I don't have a particular
problem with that.
Sorry.
But we may still want simply to
say that instead of Xiao Mei.
Um,
provides to allow for the
informal.
Uh, alternative dispute
resolution systems, but
Um
Yeah, I could see, I could see
why you might wanna have a
method to do that.
Um, but again, it's their
compact and I'll follow his lead
on this. Thank you. All right,
the motion before us is to
strike what is Article 19 of the
bill is written on page 30.
Is there any other discussion,
any objection to adopting that
amendment
to explain,
are you objecting? No, no, I'm
voting.
OK, you're objecting to the
amendment and you want to
explain your vote.
OK, uh, that amendment is
adopted.
Center masters. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Just briefly, I think
we could.
I know the hour is late and so I
appreciate it, but I think we
could, if we had more time to
suggest upon the request of all
parties involved. In other
words, I think we can alleviate.
And solve 90% of our issues with
just
Language changes while staying
relatively consistent with the
original text. Thank you.
H 6.
6, we were just on 30. 0, don't
get mad. I, I'm jumping around
here
when you're ready, I'm ready
with the motion. All right, I
will get there as quickly as I
can. I think, I think we've,
we've done well, but I, I'm
sorry if I gave you some false
hope there but
that was further into the
project then we might, we might
have wanted. Um, this is just a
question they won't take much
time, I don't think, but it's a
concern. On Article 4 of the
bill, page 6, line 20.
A physician designates a state
of principal license, and this
language is all for that. My, my
question is on paragraph 4.
Uh, paragraph one a physician
designates his state, a
principal license in paragraph
one, it says the state of his
prin his or her principal
residence orgraph 1, paragraph
2, the state were at least 25%
of the practice of medicine
occurs, 3, the location of the
physician's employer, all of
those make some sense to me for
where a physician designates the
principal license, but, but the
fourth one has uh some pause for
me. A physician can designate
his state or principal license
here as the state.
Where the physician.
Reports their residents for
purposes of federal income tax.
Um, if, if the state does not
qualify under those other
paragraphs. Explain to me what
that's intended to do. What,
what does the physician get to
pick their state or where
they're licensed based on where
they uh file their federal
income tax.
Mr. Chair, I'll have Mr. Masters
explain that.
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, we, we
think this is substantive
because some state has to have
the legal responsibility to do
the uh uh bedding of the
applicant and to be uh to issue
the uh
Uh, appropriate documentation
showing that the uh that that
that's the physician satisfies
the criteria of the compact. So
we, we have to have somebody,
uh, who has, uh, uh.
Made that decision based on some
criteria and the, the, we, we
think the uh
Formula that's set forth in the
in the compact is is is a good
way to do that and
Would uh would, would uh feel
that we, we are creating a
problem for the other states if
we were to change this, uh,
to the place where the uh income
tax return was filed. I agree
that sometimes you can argue
about what constitutes
citizenship or residency, but I
think if it's spelled out in the
statute.
It generally would be
controlling.
I appreciate the answer. The
only concern I have is whether,
because I'm not seeing something
here. Let me just see. I'm
trying to see if I got this
right.
I'm, I'm, I'm not gonna be late
with this one. The, the concern
I have is, we see this a lot in
the practice of medicine. We
call it forum shopping, right?
So a physician can designate uh
a state of license your
principal licensure based on the
physician's principal residence.
That may be one state, um, a
state in which the position has
has at least 25% of the
physician's practice of
medicine, that's gonna be
ambiguous. I'll give you a good
example, where I live in Las
Cruces. Many people from Las
Cruces have their medical care
in El Paso or on the Texas side
is much larger city, El Paso's
got a population of 600,000, um,
and, um, medical school, very
large medical school on campus,
and a lot of physicians were
there as a result. So a lot of
Las Cruces and Southern New
Mexicans get their
treatment and care there.
And so if the licensure can be
with the physician has 25% of
the physician's practice of
medicine where it occurs, you
could live in New Mexico, you
could be practicing in El Paso,
that's not uncommon, uh, or vice
versa live in El Paso practiced
in Las Cruces, so, so when you
say 25% of the physicians
practice in medicine, that's
going to be ambiguous because
when you define 25% of a
practice, is that based on, uh,
fees, uh, is that number based
on number of patients? Is that
any number of criteria that is
left undefined.
Right? When you say 25% of the
practice, like say the words 25%
of my practice. Well, you're
talking about my verdicts or my
judgments, or are you talking
about my hours, or you're
talking about uh um my clients,
any of those things are are left
on set, so that's gonna, that's
gonna create an ambiguity, but I
won't try and fix that um here.
I'm just anticipating that I
think that'll be a challenge
down the road is what is, what
is the definition of a practice.
I'm, I'm back to page I'm back
to 2 page 12.
Um, I'm gonna move to strike the
entirety of this section, we've
struck part of it.
But this gets back to the royal
issue, remembering this is the
review organization Immunity Act
under New Mexico law, this would
create a conflict, in my
opinion, um, and it's not just
the, uh, the definition of these
records to be investigated.
But you're looking in
subparagraph C, it says the
subpoena issued by a member
state shall be enforceable in
other member states. That's
pretty broad and different
authority to say subpoena issued
by a member state can be
effective and enforceable in any
other member state. It goes on
to say, but only to the extent
both states agree.
To participate in a joint
investigation, the states may
not agree, uh, if, if, if I'm,
I'm trying to challenge the
practices of another state.
Um, and I want to subpoena
records from them. This is
saying that subpoenaed by me in
New Mexico is only gonna be
affecting the other state of the
other state agrees, and, and
that's what it says, it says
that the Sabina's only
enforceable only to the extent
both states agree and are
participating in a joint
investigation that may limit me.
Um, I, I may want to
Have access to those records by
subpoena and then it goes on and
subgra. It says board members
may share investigative
litigation or the compliance of
materials.
Uh, and so as a member state may
investigate violations of
statutes authorizing the
practice of medicine in any
other member state.
Where the physician holds the
license, that's pretty broad. A
member state may investigate.
Violations of statutes
authorizing the practice of
medicine and any other member
state. Think about that for a
moment.
a
member state New Mexico could
investigate violations of
statutes in another state.
Um
And where a physician might hold
a license in another state. The
goal here is, of course, have
physicians to be able to license
themselves in multiple other
states.
But, but say member state may
investigate violations of
statutes in any other member
state confers quite a bit of
jurisdiction on on states to, to
enforce across the way. So all
of these are just my way of
trying to explain that I think
article 9 on page 12 should
really be struck in its entirety
center doing, I think already
struck by 15 and 16.
But I think the entirety of that
is problematic by the, by the
authority that it gives for
subpoenas across state lines,
and for the sharing of
investigative materials across
state lines, um, and also that
uh gives the authorities, as I
said, member state to
investigate violations in
another state.
Um, in subgraphy.
So I think all of, all of those
are problematic and for that
reason I before the committee
would ask that we strike Article
9 pages 12 through 13.
That's my
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Matthews. May we
ask, um,
The
Whether it's substitive in the
compact mind.
Uh, uh, Mr. Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, they,
uh, there were 22 issues that we
were concerned about when this
was drafted one
One was the
Issue pertaining to.
Uh
Whether or not public safety is
served.
Uh, but allowing
States that are members of the
compact.
To be able to investigate such
things as a patient abuse, uh,
sexual issues, uh, as, as most
of the
committee is probably already
aware, one of the first things
the licensed professional who
gets into trouble by violating
the Practice Act.
does is to run to another state
and try to get away and avoid
it. So we, we, we want to have
the ability to allow states to
share information that could
endanger the public in other
states, uh, while preserving.
Uh, some measure of due process.
Uh, also, at the time we drafted
the compact, we weren't
expecting the US Supreme Court
to reverse 50 years of
reproductive health law by
overruling Roe versus Wade, and
we think that the subpoena
provisions.
Ought to allow a state that
believes that issuing a
subpoena.
For an act that was otherwise
Uh, lawful in the state wouldn't
be a uh an action for which a
subpoena would be issued in that
particular state. Uh, if your
law
says otherwise about
reproductive care that's
offered.
Uh, it gives the state some
choices, uh, based on what their
standard is with regard to the
practice of medicine in each
state and that's, that's
something we're trying to
Barely apply in a, in a
federalism sort of way. And so
that was the, that's the reason
that uh uh those provisions are
contained in
In uh the, the
Compact and so we, we regard
them as significant.
Mr. Chair, I, I would add that
she was added specifically.
And uh again, according to the
guidelines we were looking at
from various states in order to
protect doctors who are uh
engaged in reproductive.
Medicine, including abortion.
Um, the joint investigation
piece is an important part of
the subpoena protection.
think brother.
Um, I appreciate that concern
with regard to reproductive
rights, and we've worked here
pretty hard in this legislature
in, in New Mexico passed laws
that protect uh
Individuals from that privacy,
we've done that earlier in this
session, so I, I applaud that. I
think that's important.
Particularly because as I
pointed out to my colleagues, my
daughter is completing her
residency in obstetrics, right?
So in Texas, imagine. So, um,
yeah, we, we want to maintain
her, her privacy, but
The, the language is problematic
for me in subparagraph C you
referred to represented as a
subpoena issued by a member
state shall be enforceable and
other member states. I'll just
stop right there. If I issue a
subpoena in New Mexico, I can
have it enforced in Texas, but I
have to go through a
domestication process and get a
court in Texas to issue a
subpoena and New Mexico sub
speedo won't be effective alone
in Texas. I, I can't take you to
Mexico to go serve in El Paso. I
have to go to uh Texas court and
get a Texas court to assist me
doing so. But, but this one
Limit that. This would say a
subpoena issued by a member
state shall be enforceable in
other members of state, but only
to the extent most states agree.
And so that would limit what is
right now already speed
authority by, by your bill if I
am in New Mexico and I'm a
member state and I wanna have a
subpoena against Texas. Let's
assume they're members say too
the text could just say, no,
your speed is ineffective,
because it says the subpoena
issued by a member state in New
Mexico, I be enforceable in
Texas, other member states, yes,
but only to the extent both
states agree in Texas we just
say we don't agree, um, and, and
so I, I, I you know all of these
are just reasons that I think
that entire.
should be a strut article 9, but
think we've addressed the issue
long enough. Anyone else?
We can probably address the
action on the, on the motion
before us, so anyone else is uh,
is there an objection to
adopting that is an amendment
striking what is now Article 9
page 1213.
reminds us consider O'Malley.
members in the affirmative, that
amendments adopted.
Yeah
You're ready for a motion now,
Mr. Chairman. I may be very
close to Senator Stewart, um.
It's been good work with them by
my colleagues tonight and a lot
of the concerns I had were
addressed in earlier amendments,
so I appreciate that very much I
appreciate Senator doing
spending a lot of time doing so.
Mr. Chair, can I ask you, um,
Uh, um
A clarification. Article 9 only
applies to joint investigations
based on the title.
And so
Um,
it seems that these rules are
actually
seem to me to be pretty good
rules for joint investigations.
And they're not necessarily
By, by the title itself,
intended to be
Um
You know, without a joint
investigation, you getting a a
subpoena in Texas or because
you're doing your own
investigation, it's not part of
somebody else's.
Another state's investigation
joint investigation here means
investigation by more than one
state. Maybe we should just
clarify that to investigations
by states or something like that
to make it clear because I'm
afraid we're losing some
important protections if we
strike.
This entire section.
Because it really was designed
to provide
Um, protection to doctors.
Who
What
Providing reproductive.
Medical services in another
state, that state undertakes its
own investigation.
We don't want them to be able to
come and subpoena a New Mexico.
Uh, doctor, if, and they can't
unless it's actually a New
Mexico and a just use Texas as
an example of Texas
investigation. So,
I
Um, maybe we need to add a
clarifying word or something
there, and we'd be happy to do
that, but uh I'm a little
concerned we're throwing the
hate to use the sprays the baby
out with the bathwater, but um,
See if we can't.
Keep these protections in place.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
I'm, uh, moving ahead for
Senator Stewart, but, um, but
others, so on page 21,
what was Article 13, this is
the, the subject that comes up
for me frequently when we look
at these interstate compacts,
so, uh, which Article 13 on page
21 is entitled Finance Powers.
This reads the commission May
levy on and collect an annual
assessment from each member
state to cover its operations
and activities of the commission
and its staff. I asked the last
meeting with the annual budget
was, I think we were told it's
about a million dollars of the,
of the commission right now.
And, and, and I'm just, I'm, I'm
trying to figure out.
It says the total assessment.
Uh, shall we approved each year
and the assessment shall be
allocated upon a formula to be
determined by the commission.
promulgated a rule. Can you, uh,
can you tell me representative,
how today with the other states
participate, out of the
commission allocates the levy
that they, they imposed upon
each member state. First of all,
I guess the first question was,
who's going to pay that for New
Mexico? Who, who pays that, um,
that levy, the state of Mexico,
do we use the lipstick or have
to appropriate the levy or who
pays it.
Ah
Mr. Chair, um, in fact, the
commission has never levied uh
fees on any state.
Uh, that's according to the
website, and I'm sure that Mr.
Masters can confirm that.
They operating money comes from
um the fees that the doctors pay
for the for the licensing.
Which is, I believe, $700 per.
License,
I think it's $700 per license
per doctor. OK. And, and I'm,
I'm glad to know the commissions
never levied, but uh, if we
adopted this, they could, right,
at some point in time and they
could just decide, well, we
don't like work operating on a
million dollars here. We'd like
to operate on $10 million a year
and, and our fees are not going
to cover it and so we want to
levy on the state. So back to my
question, who because we'd be
giving them authority to do that
here we pass this, who pays?
Who, who would pay it under
this, under this compact.
Wait,
was the levy Mr. Chair, the
again, the interstate commission
is governed by the, the
commissioners and two of whom
are going to be New Mexicans if
we're in this.
And this would be something then
that all the states would be
talking about.
It, it's not as if there's some
monolithic person up here making
all the decisions. This is run
by through the Interstate
commission.
The Interstate commissioners,
and
Um
Every state is gonna have the
same question you're asking,
which is, well,
We haven't had to pay in the
past.
We're not set up to pay for
this.
Oh, why are you asking us to pay
for it now.
And I, I think
You know, could that change at
some point? I, I appreciate that
anything can change it at any
point, but it has not been the
history, and it's
Every state is going to be in
the same situation we are, which
is going to be to say, we don't
wanna have to pay for this.
Um
And uh if we need additional
moneys, let's uh increase the
fee on the on the doctors.
I'm sure doctors don't
appreciate that, but, but they
are the beneficiaries of this.
In many ways.
And we're are.
People are the beneficiaries of
this service.
that these doctors can provide.
New Mexicans from other states.
Um
I, I appreciate what you're
telling me, which is that
they've never done this, they've
never levied, but we're giving
them that authority, but if we
pass this, we're giving them the
authority to levy an annual
assessment, and it just says
from each member state, so that
language would suggest to me
they're they're gonna charge the
state of New Mexico. I don't
know who they send the bill to,
uh, and I don't know where the
money comes from out of what
fund and what appropriation,
but, but we're, we're proposing
to give him that authority, and
well I, I appreciate you telling
me they've never done it before
and we passed this, this law,
they could do so with New
Mexico. I'm, I'm.
A little bit concerned about.
Um, giving, uh, giving ourselves
away that authority, but
Hopefully you hopefully you're
right, it never happens.
Um, then it goes on to say the
assessment shall be allocated on
a formula determined by the
commission.
And there's no promulgate rules
to do that. I'm just, again, I'm
kind of curious in my earlier
question, which is, will they
levy the assessment on New
Mexico compared to Florida based
on the number of doctors that
they're uh qualifying under the
compact? Are they gonna do it
based on population, based on
State resources, revenues, uh,
I'm not sure, but
it's not in here, it's undefined
and it's a little problematic
for me to ever as a New Mexican
legislator saying, yeah, we're
gonna pass a compact that says
these people can levy an
assessment.
On a member state, whoever's
gonna pay it, maybe the doctors
are all gonna chip in and take
pass the hat. I don't know what
they're gonna do, um, but it
could be coming back to us, so
um.
I think I'm done representative.
I'm, I'm not sure how I'm gonna
vote on the bill yet.
But I'll wait to see if there's
anyone else coming through on
the bill. You can, you can
probably tell. I appreciate you
took into consideration a number
of concerns I had and I think
we've made some improvements
that could compact, so we're
done with Senator Stewart. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I move a do
pass on house Bill 243 as
heavily amended.
Right, that's the motion before
us. We'll do a call from
my place.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah, no.
Yes.
Yes, please.
No,
it would do pass so
congratulations. Thank you very
much, uh, committee members that
completes our work for tonight.
Yes, there is.
00, you're right, we did. I'm
sorry, I'm terribly sorry. Um,
did you get your moments, Mr.
Cha, it hasn't come yet. I know
that, I know they're working
diligently on it, but I haven't.
Romero. She was here.
I think she said she went back
to the floor.
OK, all right, let's be fair to
her. Yeah, sorry, Senator
Stewart. Let's call her, um,
but we don't have the amendment.
I understand that. Well, let,
let's have her hear the bill.
Let's get her started. Well, we
have people here who are in the
audience are here on the bill,
so it's not be disrespectful to
their time too. We'll hear them
out as well too, so let's take a
moment, um, you all give us just
about a couple of minutes to
stretch and bring in
representative Romero will bring
her in.
Probably hear from those of you
that are here on the bill, and
uh we may have to wait till our
next meeting, which will be
tomorrow. We'll meet sometime
tomorrow, we'll find a widow.
Give us a 5-minute stretch, can
we?
That told me they're looking for
her, right?
That one, that one.
I just want to be.
shows up
I don't
that's.
Just
OK, thank you. Why don't we go,
uh, why don't we uh start the
audio on the webcast.
Thanks, everyone. Thanks
everyone. So, uh, House Bill 4,
I'm sorry, I'll spell 346ent
Romero. We have the floor. Thank
you, um, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I missed your,
uh, history of hemp that I know
you were just having and then as
a break, um, but the truth is
that this bill is about child
safety. If anything else. Uh,
what we've seen in our
communities and across the state
is the ability for,
unfortunately, this
Um, very nuanced form of THC,
which is a synthetic or
semi-synthetic form of THC to
hit shelves across convenience
stores, gas stations, etc. Um,
that essentially has a
psychoactive component that was
never intended when we legalized
hemp, that we are now trying to
not only tamp down upon, but
essentially just eliminate from
commerce altogether. We want
anything psychoactive to stay
with the CCD.
Um, with the cannabis control
division and the way in which we
regulate cannabis and ensure
that what we do with he stays in
the realm of CBDs and some of
the other great opportunities
that we see across the state,
across the country today, um,
that we would like to keep legal
this um
In addition to essentially
eliminating the opportunity for
semi-synthetic or synthetic
psychoactive hemps to persist in
New Mexico. Um, we also just
clarify the rulemaking, do a
little clean up in the, in the
hemp um realm and of course, the
jurisdiction for this is within
the New Mexico Environment
Department and the Department of
Agriculture, so you just wanna
clarify the fact of what we're
trying to do today, and that's,
um, hospital 346. I have a
great team of experts here, um,
who you may be familiar with,
and I'll let them introduce
themselves.
Good evening, uh,
Mr. Chair and Committee on John
Roderick. I'm the deputy cabinet
secretary at the Mexico
Environment Department.
Good evening, chairman and
senators, my name is Jonathani.
I'm the bureau chief for the New
Mexico Environment Department
Cannabis Hemp Bureau.
A chair members of the
committee, and Kevin Graham, I'm
Chief General Counsel for the
regulation and Licensing
department, and of course we
have the cannabis control
division under us.
will stand for questions, Mr.
Chair.
And thank you all for, for
staying with us tonight. We, uh,
What are we, does anyone signed
up to, to do public comment?
Why don't we just buy a show of
hands who is here in support. My
Chopin, who was who was here in
opposition. Thank you all for
being here. Uh, members, is
anyone signed up in opposition?
Anyone on Zoom?
All right, thank you. Members of
the committee, Senator Duhague.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So time is absolutely right that
there are these dangerous
products that are being sold at
gas stations and, and they're
totally unregulated and, and we,
we need to do something about
it, um.
My problem with this pill is
that it, it throws the good out
with the bad. There are, there
are folks out there who are
manufacturing products that are
not these dangerous products who
under this approach, uh, would
no longer be able to do so. Um,
So I have an amendment, I mean
in 05.1, but I also have a move
for the purposes of discussion.
And what this does is and
And it has uh
What is a four-letter word
inside a judiciary of
notwithstanding that, that it is
just too late at night to pick
up a better way to say it.
Sorry, guys. Um, but what this
does basically is it makes sure
that folks who who are using
these he he drives, uh,
products.
For
As, as part of the process of
the product that they're making.
Um, that it doesn't exclude
their ability to do so. Um, but
it specifically says that
That this is not for consumer
use, it is not for retail, uh,
distribution. It will, it is
just, it is basically the, the,
this bill gets rid of the
concept of um intermediate
hemp-rid product, and by doing
that, it, it creates a problem
for people who use those kind of
intermediate products, not to
create dangerous vapes that are
sold at 7-Eleven, but to create
another products down the line.
And so this is
basically a carve out to make
sure that
folks who are using these for
legitimate reasons and not to
create dangerous products can
continue to do so, but still
can't give them, can't sell them
directly to a consumer or put
these them directly for sale.
They're just part of the, the
chain of production.
So I would move this amendment,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So as
we're trying to unpack this, I
think the most, um,
Sort of unfriendly part about
this amendment is the above 30%.
So what happens right now with
these products is that for in
intoxicating synthetic
cannabinoids or semi-synthetics
is the above 3/10% is where the
unregulated territory comes. And
so we don't know what's actually
in these products, whether it be
Delta 8, Delta 9, or perhaps
anything else. We know of one
manufacturer in the state that's
doing these products today.
Most, the vast majority are
coming from out of state. So why
we're here today as well is to
understand that yes, we, we know
of one manufacturer we're trying
to kind of nip this in the bud
or we don't want it to grow as
an industry, understanding that
this regulation around the
semi-synthetic syn synthetics
have, we have no testing
capability around after 30%. We
don't have an ability for us to
really wrap around what these
products become once they're
intoxicating, and so the
concentration above is really
where we're
Um, sort of at a crossroads as
to how we might be able to, to
grapple with this, not having
that regulatory framework to
work with it.
And,
and Mr. Chad, say,
so where this going directly to
consumers? Yes, that would
totally be a concern, but this
is specifically saying they
can't go directly to consumers.
It can't go on the retail
market.
It is, there are, there are
manufacturing procedures where
at some point in that procedure,
it will get above that, that,
above 30%. Um, with the eventual
product that goes to consumers
is generally the left.
And so this is a, if we're gonna
get rid, uh, I think it's
frankly problematic to get rid
of this kind of this concept of
the intermediate.
Products, but if we're going to,
That unless we wanna, you know,
put a bunch of legitimate
entrepreneurs out of business.
Uh, we, we need to find some way
to carve it out. I will say that
in other states that have passed
similar legislation. Uh, they're
now embroiled in lawsuits, uh,
the federal farm bill, uh, is
due this year. Um,
reauthorization is due this
year, uh, and it's expected to
address the hemp loop loophole
at a federal level. I'm not even
sure you need to do this at the
same level. I, I think it would
make sense to see what happens
at the federal level first, um,
but then again, weird things are
happening on the federal level,
so I don't know. But um,
But, but I, I think, I think I
would have the same concern as
the representative, if these
were going directly to the
consumer, but they are not.
If I may just because we,
we, uh, no one was recognized.
We'll go to the committee here
in a sec.
But in addition to your
comments, did the, did any of
the actors want to talk about
the amendment. We're still on
the amendment. We're still
getting the sponsors feedback on
the MM,
Mr. Chair, if we can just talk
about a little bit of the
regulatory framework for what
this would sort of include and
then remove um if it, if it's
helpful because we have
clarified parts of this
amendment that would, would not
be necessary and others that
would encumber areas that we
have no ability to regu.
If it's in the, it'll probably
happen during a Q&A, but just, I
just want your
is there a unfriendly
unfriendly, Mr. Chair.
Understood, but did anyone else
want to make a comment as to why
they have concerns.
No, that's, that's fine. I can
ask.
and members of the committee,
and we'll go to committee and
we'll, we'll flush it out. I'm
sure there'll be questions. All
right, thank you for that. It's
for questions. It's unfriendly.
It's unfriendly. Is everyone
aware of the members of the
committee.
Uh,
Senator Chairman, I would like
to hear from the expert on
Neman.
I mean they're about to say
something, and
But now they're not listening.
Um
A representative, could we hear
from your expert on the.
Yes, ma'am, uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator.
The issue that we see with this
is that
Total THC concentration that is
a part of this amendment only
covers about 2% of the
semi-synthetic and synthetic
concerns that we have.
Most of these semi-synthetics
and synthetics will not be
measured in that total THC
concentration and would not be
captured by this amendment.
So Mr. Sherman, do you have a
suggestion? Do you have a uh an
amendment to the amendment. Can
you make it better? Can you make
it so that it works? I have 30
seconds,
can I have 30 seconds? Yes,
absolutely.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I'm just
reading through this again, and
I'm, I'm actually struggling a
bit to understand the intent of
the amendment other than
The bill says that a
manufacturer and a retailer
cannot possess.
And you're saying that they can
But they can't make it into a
product or distribute it.
No, no, Mr. Chair. No, it's
making it so that manufacturers
can use this as as a
Uh, because part of it.
I'm sorry, it's late. Um, so,
no, it would be so the
manufacturers can use this,
cannot give it directly to, to a
consumer, cannot um sell it
directly, but as part of their
process in manufacturing
legitimate products, not the
dangerous ones that we're
concerned about, uh, that, that
it wouldn't put them, take away
their ability to use this.
As as an intermediate step in
their process. And so it'll be
then the late, there'll be in
the uh finished product down the
line.
That would not
violate what you're trying to do
here otherwise. But partway
through that process, it's going
to end up violating it, so it
will cut off their ability to do
that manufacturing altogether.
This is, this is casting too
wide a net as it is currently
written, and it is catching both
the bad guys and the good guys.
And so we need to
Take a, a more, uh, a little bit
more subtle approach to this if
we're gonna, if we're gonna pass
this.
We need to, to take a
thoughtful, subtle approach to
it. Senator Stewart has the
floor.
I give it up.
Members of the committee on the
uh center was, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Can you just get
Senator Do, can you give me an
example of the types of
legitimate products that would
have this as an intermediate
step.
Yes, so there are
I, I'm trying to think how to
describe. I don't want to like
name specific companies, um.
There are edible products. They
are edible hemp products, uh,
that are
Manufacturer and partway through
that manufacturing process.
They include this, they include
hemp derived products that get
over that 3/10%. The eventual
product.
It's not. It is, it is a a
finished product that is below
the 3/10%. But that, that's what
they you result, that's what you
get at the end, and it's
If we say you can't have any of
those hemp products that get
over that 30% ever, then they
can never get to that finished
product that would be otherwise
be totally lawful.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think that answered my
question, but
Um, my question was gonna be if
If it's not for the consumer.
And so therefore, the no one can
walk into a store and get these
products. How does the
manufacturer get the product, or
who, how does someone get these?
products that are prohibited in
the bill but are allowed in the,
in the amendment
Mr. Chair, I think my
understanding is that it happens
as part of the manufacturing
process.
And uh
what, what uh you wanted to
respond. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, senators, so
With this provision, essentially
wouldn't be allowed to be
possessed or purchased, right?
Cause we would still need to be
able to look at packaging. We
would still have to look at um
the manufacturing process in
order to be able to test it and
show what what consumers would
get. So right now in Colorado,
for instance, they allow this
practice. That's why we're
obscene Colorado product on our
shelves today, but they prohibit
the sale of this product in
Colorado today. So they allow
their manufacturers to make it
and sell it to New Mexicans.
This is a practice that we feel
is unfriendly to our neighbors,
whether it be in Texas or
Arizona or Colorado, um, to be
able to accept a product like
this, while the 3/10 of a
percent is a threshold that um
exists, that's already current
practice with, with hemp.
products, they're tested to make
sure that they maintain a level
beneath that. Um, it's, it's
sort of a, a measure for our
ability to ensure that there's
no intoxicating substance, but
we know that hemp has that, that
threshold ability, um, but with
that, you know, that, that's
already current practice. It's
not, this doesn't change
essentially the manufacture of a
a hemp product. Um, what it does
allow though is for the
potential allowance of a a delta
9 or 8 product that we know is
intoxicating that.
We're seeing on shelves that
people are buying and consuming
as a cannabis product, which we
do not want.
I move the amendment.
OK
The, the, the movement hasn't
been moved. I believe it was
moved prior, but anyway, is
there any discussion on the
amendment further discussion.
And anyone opposed to the
amendment.
And you want to post, please
raise your hand, please note
Senator Stewart, Senator
O'Malley opposed to the
amendment.
No
Alright, so let's call the other
then itself colorro.
Yeah.
Yes.
So that motion fails 3 to 3.
Members of the committee on the
bill unamended, uh, Senator do
it, please. So, Mr. Chair,
unamended, we should not pass
thus. This is, this is casting
way too wide a net.
This is going to eliminate not
just the bad guys, but the good
guys too.
Um, where other states have
passed similar legislation. They
are now embroiled in lawsuits.
So
I think we should, and again,
this is being addressed.
Currently, in the
reauthorization of the Federal
Farm Bill.
So we should probably, if, if
we're not gonna
We should probably wait and see
what happens on the federal
level, and then come back. This
is absolutely an issue that
needs to be addressed.
I don't disagree with that
whatsoever. There are definitely
some dangerous products out
there that we need to find a way
to appropriate to to regulate,
uh, and, and keep away from our
kids. Um, this is not a good
approach to doing.
This, this wipes out legitimate
folks in addition to the bad
guys.
Any
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much. It's like I forgot
the terminology, but let me see
if I could dig it up. The um
cause I know we're trying to
Get rid of. Um,
We're trying to get rid of uh
What is it called? Oh, Delta
like Delta Delta 9, we got to
get rid of that. But I, I tend
to agree with Senator Doig that
this may get rid of more stuff.
So if this were to become law,
would CBD
it could be outlawed.
voice,
our experts.
Mr. Chair, the answer is no. All
natural product would still be
Available to manufacture to
purchase, in addition to that,
our current manufacturers in New
Mexico are currently allowed to
possess product over 0.3% as the
senator mentioned earlier, it's
part of the process. That's
already allowed. They are
allowed to maintain that
product, use it.
create their finished products.
So this bill would not affect
any natural cannabinoid have
derived products. So, so, um,
Representative Romero experts,
so CBN CBG CBC, all that CB
stuff, you're suggesting, you're
telling me that if this became
law, that that would still be
products on the show, Mr. Chair.
Um, anything that's naturally
derived, totally fine. CBD CBG,
all of those are naturally
derived, completely legal.
OK. So, so my next question, so
apparently there's um
Like a cigarette that's not
controlled by the cannabis
regulation Act that you
purchase, you ignite, and it
gets you high.
Uh, and, and I don't think those
should be in stores because
those are sold, you know, over
the counter to kids.
Can't today.
A police officer who's well
versed and empowered in the act,
uh remove those from the
shelves.
Mr. Chair, um, as the
regulations currently exist,
there is no authorization,
there's no regulatory authority
for the police to do anything
with retail.
That's one of the loopholes
here. They have jurisdiction
over transport.
Of the hemp products and and
other things, but no way to
enforce and again no way to test
the product to determine what it
is.
But, but, um, Representative
Ronaldo gentleman, you're
talking hemp. You're talking,
you're talking him I'm talking
cannabis or can someone say,
hey, that's illegal cannabis.
Where's
the law currently right now for
cannabis is limited only to
Delta 9 tetrahydrocrinatal.
And so it's very specific in the
you know, looked up the
reference before we started
hearing but it's very specific
of the definitions on the
cameras Regulation Act that the
cannabis regulation Act only
controls Delta 9 tetrahydro,
some product you're talking
about, many of those, to our
knowledge and experience, would
be Delta 8 or other derivatives
that are synthetically produced
by a chemical process to alter
hemp, those would not be in any
way right now, illegal.
State of New Mexico. So law
enforcement couldn't sees them
as evidence of a crime. Now, if
one of those products went over
the concentration level for
Delta 9, then it would be a
violation of cans, but what
we're really after here are the
synthetic cannabinoids. And so
my question is why doesn't this
just simply go after the Delta
AIs maybe, things of that
nature, um, because Senator, um,
Mr. Chair, the unfortunate thing
is that every single year, the
synthetic or semi-synthetics
come up with a 9, 1011, 12, a
new name in which we're trying
to encumber within the product
sort of basis on the hemp side,
and it's all just about the
derivatives of THC that we're
trying to encumber within the
semi-synthetic and synthetic
realms, so that way anything
that is actually containing THC
that is meant to be psychoactive
stays in the cannabis realm,
whereas this type of synthetic
or semi-synthetic.
On the hemp side, it's just no
longer allowed essentially in in
general commerce, mostly because
2, to your point, um, Mr. Chair,
they're being, you know,
advertised to kids when we're
seeing the confusion between
what's in the news about what's
being advertised to children or
packaged incorrectly or not
meeting the standards of
cannabis is typically being uh
packaged as delta 8 delta 9 type
products that are not at all
regulated. Thank you very much.
members of the committee,
Senator Stewart.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I um move we
reconsider the action we took on
the amendment.
Well, there's really a majority
of time.
OK, great. So I take that as a
motion to uh
The movie amendment 105.1 on the
amendment.
So I think we have to take the
motion first. Yeah,
Yeah.
Of course.
There's a motion on the table.
There's a motion on the table by
Senator Stewart 105.1.
A reconsider. Oh, great, OK, I
got, I understand. So there's a
motion to reconsider, anyone
opposed to the reconsideration.
Any anyone opposed to the
reconsideration, please note
General O'Malley is opposed to
reconsideration. The rest voted
in the affirmative. OK, great.
So now we're gonna reconsider
the Chairman.
I now understand the amendment,
and I'd like to pass this bill.
I think it needs the amendment,
so I move it to pass on the
amendment 105.1. We have a
motion for a pass on the
amendment, see no discussion,
please call the roll.
I
Yeah.
Yes.
So you have an amended bill on,
on the bill
members.
There's a motion for a due pass
as amended in a discussion
signal further discussion,
please call the roll.
O'Malley?
Yes.
No.
Tomorrow, Thursday is not a
regularly scheduled committee
day, but it's very probable
we've got making sure we have
rooms reserved and so please
stay subject to call the chair,
OK? Have a good night's sleep.
Thank you.
