If we enact this bill why is
that think about it someone is
going to be doing a great job
and is happy in their position
there most likely not actively
looking for a job that is why
many organizations higher
headquarters to go after those
persons who are happy in their
jobs.
And our high achievers are well
liked by their supervisors when
these folks are told that their
name we public ages call they
say forget it the opposition
claims that we have attracted
multiple candidates they're
doing the job successfully
somewhere else I strongly
disagree.
Recently when the state city we
Q. one advertise nationally for.
But please change the gotten
only one candidate from a large
city and that was a.
officer was working for the city
of Philadelphia is the community
community relations officer the
last time APS without for
superintendent they got one
candidate from a large.
city and that was as a candidate
from Rochester New York who was
unemployed last time was crucis
when out for superintendent they
didn't get one candidate from a
similarly sized school
districts.
I challenge anyone to name one
person the servers and a high
level public position recently
in New Mexico they want to add
to a bigger and better position.
Sure this is not a perfect
solution most of the issues are
not however the positives of
this far outweigh the negatives
again we were only one of five
states that.
The permit the publication of
every name is for that meeting
of our every person was a pie
for high level government job.
Hi this bill this is indoors by
the New Mexico to Nestle in New
Mexico school board association
The New Mexico coalition of
educational leaders the council
of university presidents you are
in.
New Mexico state.
As well as APS in the city of
Rio Rancho.
My hope is that we New Mexico
will be the last state is
broadly accepted a realistic
provision to armed suspect to
our inspection of public records
act.
That concludes my remarks I have
with me my expert witness next
just this and we stand for
questions thank you very much.
Among the proponents so we begin
your tier time at three thirty
five center of we have another
three or so minutes for the
proponents register the only
resurrect proponent was
Katherine Posada and I saw her
here but in the end so early so
of her not being here we'll go
to the opponents will allow up
to ten minutes of opposition is
there for the for the opponents
we have registered Melanie
majors and we Lopez and Jason
Espinoza have you all got a
coordinated opposition or is it
each one of your new.
Each one of us.
Okay all right so what we'll
recognize of you in that order
majors Lopez is because each one
of you will be recognized for up
to two minutes mmhm ms majors.
Senator sat out Sunday's Mr
chairman members of the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you
today and live the life and.
Testing one two three we're good
earlier this month I sent you
letters concerning information
that I had pulled from the
reporters committee and Senator
Tallman I'm sorry but your facts
are wrong and I pulled out
information that shows almost
twenty states actually we do
respect would you please not
address members in your comments
to the chair and to the
committee.
Almost twenty of the States do
not
But the applications from being
public let me read what they do
in California there's no express
exemption from disclosure for
job applicants in Arkansas if
the applicant is successful the
applicant materials are released
Florida applications for public
employment fall within the
purview of chapter one nineteen
and are the subject to public
inspection and examination.
I can go on and on and on but we
know that these numbers are not
correct we know that it is
important that the public have
access to its information and I
would ask that you question the
information you've been provided
as we have questioned it
Mr chairman we know that you are
a past recipient of the Dixon
award and we feel that that's
important you know the value of
democracy and the importance of
having an open accountable
government and we think this is
one step to make sure it is and
we ask that you not support this
exemption to the inspection of
public records act thank you.
Majors.
What does your structure two
minutes Sir yes thank you Mr
chairman of.
The first.
Thank you Mr chairman so if the
whole.
Continuously.
Hello there there we go
Mr chairman everybody has
handouts of of a story that was
wronged in the Valencia County
news bulletin for a police of
chief for the suburb of Milan
real communities they're looking
for police chief and they pushed
in that the the they advertise
for a new police chief they had
eleven applicants for the for
the small community of small
real communities one was from
Idaho one is from Maryland one
was from Charleston South
Carolina one was from Alexandria
Virginia one from Texas one from
North Dakota for those
applicants had masters degrees
one worked at the Chicago police
department one worked in mobile
out of Alabama mobile Alabama
and one was a lieutenant at the
fort worth police department now
I submit to you that we are
getting qualified candidates now
some some communities or some
some entities have bigger
problems than to attract these
these experts when you look at
troubles at the Albuquerque
police departments had I can
understand why they would have a
difficult time attracting
attracting qualified candidates
there the other thing you have
is that we the the the presence
Association decided let's survey
your constituents and see what
they have to say in your another
handout that I've I passed out
seventy two percent of New
Mexicans do not want this bill
passed thank you Mr chairman Mr
Lopez this windows of your.
But chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico broadcaster's
Association recognizable to
minister okay thank you but we
do stand in opposition to the
legislation you know these are
public positions and they need
to be opened up to public
scrutiny I think when people
applying for these positions
they understand the
responsibility as a public
servant that they will have so
we do believe stand in
opposition to the legislation
thank you Representative spinosa
Mr Shendo you have that
registered to speak in support
of recognize you for two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Katherine Posada and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico counties we stand in
support of this legislation
there are there are a number of
county employees who would like
to apply for executive positions
but having their names made
public would would put them in
jeopardy it could cause problems
in their jobs certainly if they
made it into the finalist lists
and that makes a lot more sense
sense but otherwise we believe
that this legislation protects
them from scrutiny we urge your
support thank you.
All right completes those
registered with us to have an
opportunity to speak committee
members of questions.
What.
Motions service so question or
motion the action is chairman of
question and that is so.
I see in your.
On page two your definition of
appointed executive position.
I mean the not elected chief
executive officer of the state
agency.
Mr chair covers of the state but
does not include a political
appointment including a cabinet
secretary.
And so Mr Chairman and
Sir Thomas trustees.
I'm wondering what state agency
position would not be a
political appointment or cabinet
secretary.
Mr Chairman center thank you for
the question on my expert
witness answer that.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivey Soto I can't think of one
right off on the state level and
it may be just my lack of
imagination right now hi in most
of the positions that we have
had in mind are the local
government CEO positions and
there may be something that I'm
not thinking of it maybe
something like
Of the.
Well I'm for I'm thinking about
a mask on the of of local level
but it won't regional
organization where they do for
you do a search and get names
from around the country and then
to have a committee at all
that's and that's pretty
different than a political
appointment and I'm sorry that I
can't answer your question on
the state level I most of the
higher positions are obviously
political appointment the
cabinet secretaries and so forth
correct that and and and the
thing is that.
When you're dealing with up what
they
a local.
Public body there's a there's a
governing board whether
electoral or or or like emerges
for like ABC that W. A. where
there are like to people serving
on that board so that when I
left that for but otherwise you
know you have for some time if
you dealing with an institution.
Of that institution of higher
education which was because of
the fact that still up board of
regents of.
The show and mistrust is to do
to speak or something yes Mr
chair.
perhaps the mortgage finance
authority would be an example
for their hiring a sort of
technical head and and might
probably would do it through a
search I would think I'm not.
Personally familiar with them
but I I think that's a very
likely with the spirit of this
would apply although I Mr
chairman of the president's of
that would not get chief
executive officer that well the
cheater officer there's only one
chief executive officer.
For the mortgage finance
authority means and that's what
I mean I think that person might
not be a political appointment
right so that that that would
not be a that would not be a for
all right so like I said if it's
I. T. director something that
one life readiness Mr right and
that's been director wouldn't
apply its relatives yelled.
Position and and actually the
case of mortgage finance
authority.
they are not considered a state
agency for number purposes
and so this is where I'm.
I'm I'm struggling with the
inclusion Mr chairman.
This dominant mistrust is a
strong with inclusion state
agency.
our probability also here but
from I'm struggling with the
because a state agency just
because.
It.
We we run the risk of of and of
I have an inclusion into
executive privilege actually.
depending upon where you're
looking at on state agency and
if you are excluding political
appointments in excluding.
Cabinet secretaries I'm not
really sure what's left for CEO
position in a the state agency
Mr Chairman mistrust is.
Well Senator Mr chairman I I.
I will go on this but
it is that you really have to be
thought through and I'm sorry I
didn't think it through in
advance but state engineer as an
area I worked in for years Water
moderates again a technical as
the CEO all right and it's a and
I'm not sure that that would be
considered a political
appointment that's Mr Chairman
mistresses that's up but then I
give up I can't think of what
you I'm sorry Mr Senator yeah no
that's fine hi I I just think we
should if we're gonna do this we
should be just as clean as
possible.
And so the chairman of I would
like to suggest that we strike.
The event will.
If we start amending service
will let me yield have you here
for the smaller please refer to.
So Mr chair and senator I think
someone who would fall under
that some to someone like OSI
where they are they are
appointed by the support they
are a non executive.
Agency within the executive
branch of government they are
appointed by a board not by the
governor
so folks like sire gonna and if
I think I think there there is
this is a very and probably a
very narrow category of of folks
who were gonna.
Still exist with the slide
I but there are some oversight.
An example very soon.
He was.
State.
I typed.
I'm concerned that it.
Credit should be.
Cleaner but I will I appreciate
that Sir do it in a.
Let me yield for right now one
of if as I look something up and
then if there's the first on
discussion compact.
If not then my time is done.
Other committee members in
question.
Motions.
Senator.
What
for
the New Mexico City further
discussion on the motion.
Is there any objection the the
option of the the press motion.
I see none show some risotto
Stuart o'neill to observe Office
worth.
To pass.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee for your support.
unexciting is Senate bill eighty
thirty five of the sponsor of
Senate bill eighty server the.
Has asked that that will be
rolled over we will pay for that
today.
We have a hard stop time at five
thirty we're gonna lose of our
quorum with a couple numbers
without another committee
meeting.
Time.
So we're gonna work hard to plow
through.
Since two.
The jet items so I.
Senator Hickey the bill we've
gone through the.
Witnesses and proponents and
opponents.
Committee members of waiting in
my understanding is you have a
committee substitute.
That's correct Mr when I.
And would you explain what you
did with yet so thank you Mr
chair and senators essentially
the areas where we were having
concern at our last presentation
are on page four parentheses
number four and what followed
behind that and potentially what
we did was clean up the language
in the ambiguity
around that double saying twice
that a
SCCL just had to be there for
induction and the emerging and
also there was confusion over
language about CMS
and potentially CMS conflicting
with the state as we went back
and looked at it and look at the
original bill that language in
the CMS was not there
and some further discussion is
that actually by not having it's
the assumption is that it will
be there as it has been there
for the last ten years and both
part of the state and the
federal agency so just wanted to
bring your attention state to
number four requiring the
presence except in the cases of
emergency and the documentation
of the presence of the
supervising anesthesiologist in
the operating room during
induction of a general
anesthetic and during emergence
from a general anaesthetic the
presence of the supervising
anesthesiologist within the
operating suite and immediately
available to the operating room
and other times when the
anesthetic procedure is being
performed and requiring that the
anesthesiologist assistant
comply with the above
requirements and so and we took
out the other confusing language
and that is essentially the key
changes the other components of
the bill of a four to one ratio
of supervision of a limiting
only the county a inflicting the
sunset are still the same.
The.
All right committee members
questions on these committees of
up for so I guess we need proper
motion right Senator you'll
start.
Sure so all move the do not pass
on just because I and a a deep
pass for the purposes of
discussion on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for some of
the I do Senator.
I have a question it looks like
some of the language in that for
that was originally there wasn't
and when I heard you just read
of the
or regional anesthetic so it.
So that this would have required
the board to do rules requiring
the presence because of an
emergency a surprise
anesthesiologists during
induction of general anesthetic
as opposed to general or
regional and while I guess why
isn't regional and still in
there.
Thank you Senator Duhigg and
Mister chairman I'm gonna ask my
expert Dr white to answer that
question.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Dr McDonald
anesthesiologists.
And
No the reason we struck the
language was it it's confusing
one doesn't induce a regional
anesthetic our regional
anesthetic is a procedure so it
is no loss of consciousness and
induction is loss of
consciousness so it was just
confusing language that's all.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth sentences then
first of sure I just want to
make sure the section for work
done with the sunset on that so
we're not going to be back here
five years.
Good no no
Senator survive in senator Wirth
now.
Very well I appreciate that
again I think this.
I'm glad we were able to get to
this point because I know.
Certainly here in Santa Fe the a
play a really important
function for our hospital and so
I'm delighted that you've been
able to.
Get to this point and we're not
going to yeah I think it was it
was a subset because this was a
trial run and the trial's been
successful so it's good to get
to get this point thank
you senator thank you Mr
chairman so I'm just a little
curious what does and.
This these so it just the system
what kind of background do they
have to have before the COVID
and the C. C. all its system I
can give you would to Senator
Stewart and Mr chair would defer
to a person who actually does
this and knows it first hand and
defer to Nancy D. as who is in a
a to answer that question thank
you.
Thank you Senator Stewart the
rest of the committee
so I we have a pre medical
background you have to have a
four year degree with all the
pre medical requirements
biology's chemistries organic
chemistry cellular biology's
then you go to at least a twenty
four month program we specialize
in Anastasia only both died
tactically and clinically
you get over three thousand
hours of clinical exposure
during that time we trying to
some of the best schools in the
nation I trained personally
Emory University.
Level one right thank you yes.
And that's so that's that's also
in New Mexico these the
requirements in New Mexico yes
ma'am yes thanks committee
members questions.
Here every sort of I just have
one quick question at the time
says repealing laws two thousand
fifteen chapter two section
five.
What we were feeling.
The staff that funds at all
that's that's okay for the
second question.
The first question Mr but nobody
else has any other questions I
would move eight.
Do not pass on Senate bill
thirty five and a two passed on
the Senate Judiciary Committee
sister for several different we
we really have one previously
but with for discussion purposes
that's a motion for the
committee is there any objection
to the do passed motion.
Seeing so show service so
of Stuart we'll do a services
and we're voting in the
affirmative defense center thank
you very much Senator and thank
you Mr one to the next item
We have to settle one of seven.
On the agenda.
Hi bill
The CYFD is indicated that they
have a couple suggestions on the
bill but it's all the more that
I'd like to try and the fly if
we can pull that over to Monday.
We'll be ready to on that
Representative will soon be
rolled over thank you Sir at the
Sanchez requested is a no Sir
there's no eighty is been rolled
over the Sanchez request.
Will next year.
Senate bill sixty four we have
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you're
probably accustomed to the way
we do things here so that very
little but depending on the time
we have a lot for any given
hearing there are a number of.
Organizations and groups
investors because support my
understanding is the that we're
not gonna hear from all of them
but I to encourage individuals
to
Weigh in by registering in
advance of a hearing and so I
also think it's important to
recognize them so those who
registered speak in support or
we would support this would
include the New Mexico coalition
for for sentencing issues New
Mexico conference of churches
Lutheran advocacy ministries The
New Mexico pediatric society the
law offices of the public
defender the first judicial
district attorney's office
families against mandatory
minimums national association of
social workers southwest
organizing project gold futures
New Mexico New Mexico voices for
children.
SO Dream Team Americans for
prosperity campaign for fair
sentencing abuse from the
sentencing project do not have
anyone who registers to speak in
opposition.
We have for individuals who has
to register and speak by zoom
the and then we have the two
proponents who registered
Mexico and as long so you tell
me senator will allow for ten
minutes of advocacy let me know
how you like to a look at that
time and this sort of anymore.
I would like to.
I don't have anybody registered
in opposition of Senator but
we'll see how we do with time so
when we first we'll hear from
the proposed again I hope the
the word's gotten out there we
have our own procedures here and
and I avoid the the sometimes
practice of letting everybody go
to speak for one minute I don't
find that very constructive the
and we like to do a little bit
deeper here so
you tell me personal center how
do you like to spend ten
minutes.
Mr chair I'm just going to
introduce of the my experts and
have my experts speak on the
bill.
And then.
And then we have to figure
victims were going to speak on
the bill right well you control
the time Senator you'll of up to
ten minutes you and we what we
are relying you to cut him off
the team up we wanted to right
okay twenty.
Mr chair members of the
committee the committee is seen
this bill before at least twice
it's a bill to end life without
parole as a sentencing option
for children and it creates
early parole eligibility for
those serving long adult
sentences for crimes committed
when they were when they were
youth the bill is important to
bring New Mexico in line with
the national best practices
constitutional standards and
really put every person
especially parents no the
children are works in progress
and we need sentencing laws that
leave room for their potential
to experience positive transfer
eight friends transformation the
bill does look different from
the previous version that has
been before this body and we
want to talk about this
important difference.
I understand that Senator Pirtle
is carrying a friendly
clarifying amendment but I
believe Mr Senator Ivey Soto is
going to of submitted for him.
The knowing Wilson of who's been
working on this bill
from the very beginning can
explain both substituting just
from last session and the
friendly amendment.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee this bill does look
different than it has in the
past and not that it's been any
trouble in the past those
changes we do hope to make it
easier for this committee to
pass this legislation before I
get into those I I do want to
note that last Friday in a
Republican led effort to
Illinois became the twenty sixth
state to abolish life without
parole as a sentencing option
for children and also created a
ten year parole eligibility
which extended up till here
until age twenty one which goes
well beyond what SB sixty four
dozen we're happy to be before
this committee again now with
the opportunity to become the
twenty six state to adopt of
these sentencing policies and
I'm hopeful that the change that
we made enlighten the kind of
bipartisan support that we've
seen elsewhere on this issue so
I'll talk about that that that
substantive changes that already
exist in the bill that's before
you and then I think we probably
have to wait until the amendment
to introduce from for me to talk
about those but we we did work
diligently during the interim
session to come up with a bill
that the association of district
attorneys does not propose and
we are proud to say that we have
not the spirit of this bill
remains the same we are ending
life without parole as a
sentencing option for children
and creating meaningful
developmentally meaningful
timing for parole for those
serving long adult sentence
crimes committed when they were
children and under the previous
build version of this bill the
timing of that hearing was set
at fifteen years for everyone
now in rare and extreme cases
parole eligibility will be set
at twenty or twenty five years
into an adult sentence for first
degree murder other than felony
murder an individual will not be
eligible for consideration
parole until twenty years into
their sentence and for two or
more convictions of first degree
murder an individual must serve
twenty five years before they
are eligible for consideration
and these are changes that we
made really to reflect an effort
to account for heightened
consequences an extreme case.
This the bill of course still
just provides an opportunity for
release and not a guarantee.
And I think we but I think we
would like to yield some of our
timing other victims that have
come out during the week that
this has been on the schedule
and so if there is remaining
time the center Senators okay I
think we we would like the
victims to speak Senator you
have of about another six
minutes to so you can choose how
you wish to do.
Okay.
That they they can use it.
You know maybe we want to have
center so these are the victims
of.
This to the believers to these
are these are proponents for
your bill right.
No not exactly these are opposed
to build opposition and I did
email to register will will come
to the opposition to smoke so we
use you're still within your
advocacy okay I think we'll wait
we'll waive the rest of our time
and use that time to get the
amendment introduced.
The friendly amendment.
We'll go to the then opposition
I'm sorry you said that you did
register an opposition.
Thanks a lot.
On Wednesday.
I did it
US software.
You'll do this by email to the
committee.
The.
Looking more closely the
missiles very recommend you for
two minutes and.
Thank you hello my name is
Alexis I used to call myself a
mass shooting victim but I now
call myself a mass shooting
survivor.
So that I could take control of
my story what happened what
really I like to refer to myself
as a warrior I fight every
single day to get out of bed and
function my life was
Representative from underneath
me on August twenty eighth two
thousand seventeen because I
decided to go to Clovis carver
public library to print a paper
for college I was shot three
times my ten year old brother
was shot once I face some of you
for the third year in a row some
of you it's the first time but
my message remains the same the
humans that deserve your to
effort and motivations are the
one who wants to work violently
hurt by the to the house you're
defending I wish you would offer
your compassion toward us as
victims I do move the date this
world no longer suffers from gun
violence that Jim is far from
reality as far as the world is
today I never thought I would
experience a mass shooting never
I was a responsible strongly
motivated motivated young lady
with her whole life ahead of her
this legislation system has told
myself and other survivors and
victims to move on and get over
it how do you get over it when
your loved one is no longer here
how do you get over it when
you're in so much pain that you
can't move how do you get over
it when someone decided to take
every ounce of safety you felt
away how do you as a living
human being tell someone to get
over time a period and I'm not
motivated by revenge or hate
because what is there to avenge
what's done is done but what you
can do now is fight for the
right side for the two victims
side show New Mexicans you mean
what you said to be hard on
crime and criminals your main
point in this bill is that
juveniles brains aren't fully
developed that scientifically
true but for everyone in this
room to what makes them the
exception there scientifico
evidence and proof that we
mentally understand morals in
late childhood so our brains are
developed enough to know right
from wrong you're choosing to
support criminal to choose the
wrong I believe in redemption
and people can change but we
can't discredit the lives that
were taken and have suffered in
the hands of their crimes think
of me as your sister daughter
friend whatever I need to be for
you to feel compassion for the
time I had entered I do not
believe the system we have in
place for juvenile offenders
need to change the process is
thorough enough if anything I
would like to.
Asked that we make the sentences
longer but that's not what I'm
going to ask you the I just ask
that you focus your efforts on
juveniles who are at risk before
committing crimes I ask that you
help us to have suffered enough
for multiple lifetimes to have
justice and I asked you not pass
bills like SB sixty four that
gives justice to criminals and I
just want to show this is the
bullet that is in my tibia that
I live with to this day and will
never come out of me the paper
clips in this picture are the
entry points of two separate
bullets and then.
This picture I was shot here
right above my heart and the
bullet ricocheted off my sternum
and blow up on the side of my
rib cage.
This picture is no underlying my
ten year old brother who was
shot in the library with me the
summer before it happened.
And.
Sorry.
I was in a wheelchair for three
months I could not walk because
the bullet fractured my tibia.
And then two weeks later.
This is the tip of the bullet
that was taken out of my ribcage
my body was trying to reject it
the bullet yes I start.
I'm very lucky to be here today
and this is additional pictures
of more surgeries that I have to
remove a distrust.
I'm very lucky and blessed to be
here today thirty two librarians
who will never forget to call
home.
I really appreciate your time
and thank you very much for
listening to me.
Mr Jarvis.
Sorry.
I.
Mr was all recognize your
for up to three minutes please
thank you.
Okay.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Nicole
Chavis and this is my son Jaden.
He was seventeen years old when
he was shot and killed.
Six months later his killer
killed another eighteen year old
individual by the name of Arturo
via.
He was a student athlete captain
of the football team and the
wrestling team and played
baseball and Donna.
He'd just gotten accepted to the
Air Force Academy.
He was four hours away from
getting his pilot's license he
was an amazing child and full of
life.
I would like to thank the
sponsor and the ACLU for meeting
with me the last couple of weeks
to discuss this bill and try to
come to an agreement on and on
and on and friendly amendment I
am only able to accept this bill
with the amendment that will be
brought up shortly because.
Overall I am still not a hundred
percent at peace with the bill
but this does help my son's
killer sentenced a little bit it
still does take ten years away
from his sentence to get a the
ability for a parole hearing he
would get a parole hearing now
at thirty six years for killing
two different young man six
months apart.
Which is just heartbreaking to
me
and to me is not for justice but
is a lot better than the twenty
years he would have gotten the
parole hearing apple without
this friendly amendment that's
going to be introduced today so
thank you.
Or is there any opposition.
We have an amendment.
I'd like to.
Two two five zero one three
point.
Or
explaining the.
is your enrollment center at
this anymore Senator Pirtle
that.
This this this.
With the with the.
I just trying to
clarify the question of
welcoming by consecutive for the
current.
And this is the if someone is.
Based on multiple.
seven convictions
in the state K..
And
This is a this is consistent
with the way the
The the this because this with
with the corrections department
actually calculates and and as
an example in the case of of the
person who killed J. two.
He is currently serving a
sentence right now for for the
other young man that he killed
the according to the department
of corrections he has not been
admitted to prison yet for the
murder of Jacob.
And so this is this is
clarifying that as were counting
consecutive or concurrent the
executive orders for orchestra
begins based on on each of those
cases for assistance the second
part within the same.
hi there are actually.
As I as I've looked at this it
there's a there's a couple
places I think we need to make a
couple of clarifications if I
may and and just walking through
those and then defer to the to
the folks at the table.
And that is.
What what I would suggest is
actually strike.
arising.
For the same K. what's that
would just be convictions
period.
Because.
There could have been a couple
different cases at the same
time.
And then if the offender is
sort of services are you
offering okay are you amending
the amendment I am I'm I'm just
I'm I'm suggesting it but I'm
going to for before I actually
make the motion okay the
strike in the words are rising
from the same case.
And then on the last full line.
Strike begin to.
At the end of the line strike
is.
Being served.
And insert begins.
And so that what it would what I
would say them is.
For all eligibility of parole
hearing shall occur whether the
offender is serving concurrent
or consecutive sentences from
multiple convictions if the
offender serving consecutive
sentences for convictions
arising from multiple cases.
The time counted towards parole
eligibility for particular case
does not accrue until the until
that sentence until the
sentence.
For that case begins.
It actually I think tightens it
up and it makes clear it's it's
when the sentence for that case
begins that's what it says for
creating.
and so that because because the
thing is you could have somebody
also in terms of for for
reference in case.
In the case of James Keller he's
serving consecutive sentences
for different cases but if you
have someone who's serving
concurrent sentences for
different cases you create a
problem for yourself with that
language from the same case.
And this gentleman if we could
just let them come for for
second Senator.
Mr chair of we really worked
hard on the language both with
the drafters as well as with the
victims of.
And so I am not come to an end
with I'm not comfortable
accepting the change I think
from from following the change I
think it does what this bill
does
What the amendments are with the
amendment does so I I just
because we spend so much time.
and we're prepared to accept
Senator Pirtle amendment.
I'm having trouble understanding
why the change.
and the services just because I
I I haven't had a chance to
analyze it before Sen right here
and as an analyzing it I just I
just think that that tightens up
and takes care of some problems
but
I do understand the amount of
work that went into what is on
this page and if it is not
acceptable to you we will stick
with the result amendment as it
is drafted thank you Mr chair
Senator I appreciate that.
Sure that means having set up
forget everything I just said
that after I move amendment two
two five zero one three point
three so as a member with from
number of the amendment is also
making them of over the options
for.
Sponsored considers from members
yes that is a from we've been
thank you very much great
questions.
Our system and I just really
appreciate.
No collaboration reaching out to
the victims that's a tough one
this this bill is so much
different than what I had to go
and I just think as the right
direction and we can make up for
the pain the victims experience
but we can craft policy and
really listen to them and I feel
like this is an apple with
thank.
Other questions so worth it just
a suggestion I mean I I kind of
see to some extent where I
Senator Ivey Soto was going and
I don't think we fix it here all
can't do it online but I just
think.
Have a discussion because it's
going to the floor if there's a
way to tweak this so that we get
it perfect that works for
everyone when everyone has a
chance to to think of a point
and that's where we should do it
but I don't agree let's not do
it on the fly here but I kind of
see where you were going and but
at the same time I just I I
these are the kind of things
that.
Our delegate New Mexico I think
we need to be very respectful of
the work is been done to get
here and and we're gonna get
this right so I appreciate
that's just my comments that
senator Wirth others at the
federal.
I share the same concerns that
Center were considering sort of
express the and I can think of
another example so many of your
proposed.
The first full sentence reserve
the offenders serving
consecutive sentences for
convictions arising from
multiple cases what happens in
this circumstance when they're
serving.
For multiple charges in other
words for you when you have
consecutive sentences for
multiple charges as opposed to
multiple cases has anybody
thought that through yet.
Saying yes so.
The the reason of Mr chair
Senator the reason we think that
that's important is because of
the practice of stacked
sentencing and I would like to
turn it over to my experts
because we the intent here is to
codify existing practice of the
parole board.
That is what we're trying to
clarify.
And Mister chair members of the
committee may have gotten the
hand that you may not have but
if you did we did try and
explain what it is that we need
the amendments to preserve and
and what what what we need to
make clear that the bill does
not see with regard to
consecutive sentencing so the
the first option is the house
originally drafted right this is
the situation of consecutive
sentences same case so I think
what chairman serve on this was
just talking about multiple
charges where we stack them and
run them consecutively so it's
very important for the
meaningfulness of this bill that
that that the bill continue to
provide developmentally deep
meaningful parole hearing at
that K. so somebody is serving a
sentence there's a long staff
sentence the hearing still needs
to happen what we're saying with
this amended amendment what
we're hoping to clarify is that
that doesn't disturb if somebody
serving for two separate cases
and and I I think if if the
chair is
Favorable to the amendment
language I do think that we got
I think Kim Chavez Cook from the
LFC maybe has done sure.
Thank you Mr chairman I think I
can just respond maybe directly
to the call the question which
is one of my concerns with with
us interview so this sort of
changes to the amendment was
this particularly the striking
of arising from the same case in
that starting at the very
beginning of the amended
language because content with
the continuation from the
sentence that's in the bill
that's not on the amendment page
is that that's explaining that
the the total time accrues with
all of those consecutive
sentences within a single case
so if you're serving for example
ten third degree felonies which
is a total of three years
consecutive but it's like ten
three year sentences back to
back then you would a start you
would have that parole
eligibility fifteen years into
that thirty year sentence and
that's why I think you need that
language arising from the same
case to ensure that you're not
starting the clock over again
every three years and then the
second part of the amendment is
to address the situation that
must have as was concerned about
which is when it's two
completely separate cases we
don't want that parole hearing
to happen fifteen twenty twenty
five years into the first case
when you have even started
serving the second case and
that's to ensure that use you
start that clock over again when
you start serving the second
case if that makes sense Mr
chairman it is a very
complicated scenario and I'll
tell you have been doing this
for quite a long time and it's I
still have to go back and read
the statute book every time
these sorts of situations come
up so we're trying to keep it as
simple as possible.
Regulation terms of the more
questions so the the the
suggestion here first of all I
guess is here you're suggesting
point arising from the same case
and your your suggestion that
language is to stay in place
yes.
Then the the last last clause
their time Canada or parole
eligibility does not begin to
accrue until that.
That sentence for that case is
being served.
Okay I see it so center where
the suggested to mmhm I
understand that not wanting to
work on the fly
so transfer out whether we're
going to be do do you feel
there's an more time needed on
the movie.
We have worked really hard on it
and so I'm happy on the way to
the floor to to have that
discussion but I think everybody
that we show this to understands
it it took a long time but my
understanding from talking to
the parole board is it the the
if somebody is paroled and
they're paroled into the in the
next sentence if that makes
sense and that's very hard to
codify thank but that's what we
want to do is stay with the
existing policies and procedures
of the proboards proboards so
they get their parole hearing if
they're released then they're
released into parole for their
next consecutive sentence.
And so my observation I know
that we want to use respect
Center were suggestion that I
don't like to do things on the
floor here I don't want to do
that I certainly don't want to
send a bill out of here with the
expectation is going for the
changes between on the floor and
that's not wise either but what
I hear you saying Senator and
this cooking others would use
that you think this ammendment
is where it needs to be in its
present form absolutely so what
with that sense of the word you
know if you feel that you you
want to do some work on was
trying to that work now I mean I
understand that we do a flight
but let's see how expensive it
is I can make can make the
decision we're doing that the
case by case scenario depending
on how extensive the change
we're talking about so I'll go
back to center every Soto
quickly and we're gonna be able
to get this done mail out will
do your suggestion and maybe
work of course yes I can.
Mistrust cut but.
So that the the concern that I
have with the residents and.
Is that.
If that's the case number two.
This is the person.
Two concurrent sentencing from
case number what.
Then when they get the parole
hearing.
Fifteen years to pay for the
tier the appropriate tier.
And Mr chairman and Senator
Lopez I understand except that
it's the a rising from the same
case that creates the problem in
that.
So arising from the same case.
Works if in all scenarios you
have a the sense number two is
consecutive.
It to sentence number one.
But often times since number two
is concurrent to sentence number
one.
And so and so that's where our
rising from the same case I
think create some problematic
language I see mistrust of
starting to.
Not or had to receive the level
put off Mr chairman and senator
I think my I don't I I see what
you're describing I don't think
arising from the cases where I
would place the solution I think
what we want and that what might
be an easier simpler amendment
to the amendment would be to
strike consecutive from the next
sentence so that it would just
read if the offender is serving
sentences for convictions
arising from multiple cases
because then you have all of
their concurrent basis then
you've already started accruing
on both and it would still be
fifteen twenty twenty five years
in
but if they are consecutive then
it would be clear that you
haven't started occurring on the
second consecutive case yet.
That makes sense Mr chairman and
senator so Senator I was so
big I am persuaded them to work
on the amendment will will roll
over a vote on the amendment
compact bill and and encouraging
you to continue to speak with
Mexico.
Will resume this bill on the
amendment.
To consider were suggestion that
we try to present.
Mr chair on this on the web and
then also cost about senator
Kerr maybe think you can get
that done yeah yeah I think we
can.
Thank you Mr chair.
What's happening with your.
Forty eight.
Amendment for the
just.
Small numbers ready go along
with your super fast we will get
to see what we will hear Senate.
As the.
Seven forty eight.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the building there is a small
amendments on if you want to do
that for or afterwards.
So let me make sure since I
certain members of the press
were concerned that it is not
introduced by expert witness as
anything other than the city
council and that she is she city
council from Santa Fe also we
are married so full disclosure
since that seemed because some
individuals trouble
but this is a bill that came
from the city secretary.
For certain reporters the fact
that wasn't disclosed and again
as a so we're doing full
disclosure but this is here what
else are care or effort at
humor.
Well there wasn't much here in
the in the column that was
written about it so through was
and we have full disclosure
Mexico full disclosure I would
move
sentiment number one point two
two five three one eight point
one
to Senate Judiciary Committee.
To Senator forty eight.
For discussion explain the
moment so this this ammendment
simply creates an exemption to
the inspection when a vehicle is
purchased from and and auto
dealer either a new dealer or
use dealer there's a two year
exemption from any inspection
programs at a local government
would pass and it was this was
requested by the auto dealers
and make sense.
The members of the committee
members to questions.
So help me to sense or to and.
I also work.
So the other is what two years
what why we exempting them from
requirements or what else yes
one within two years Mr chair
because it's a brand new car so
the inspection programs designed
will kick in but when it when a
car is brand new again this is
designed to if a local
government.
Adopts an ordinance principle
this is a it's not a mandate for
classic counties to give that
option similar to what exists in
Bernalillo there's an inspection
program currently in for only
four air this would allow local
governments to adopt and vehicle
inspection program if they did
that again when you buy a brand
new car all the things you'd be
looking for an inspection would
not be needed because the car
will be coming right off the lot
it will so here's the
difficulties.
Having as a think what you're
describing it you use the
services the amendment apple to
a very able means more or use
vehicle if you purchase a used
vehicle from.
An auto dealer again.
What this is what the what the
the the local or with the things
that it could address could be a
muffler modification for
example.
Or or if it went further
depending with local government
did the options on page five of
the bill safety maintenance
could be windshields mirrors or
other vehicle parts required to
meet safety standards
established by ordinance again I
think there's an assumption that
when you're purchasing a car for
you know off awful lot from the
dealer that that that's not
gonna have to immediately go and
be inspected and that's that's
the purpose of the and.
Questions on them.
It just but to be a divorced why
two years.
everybody else will be required
to these conceivably expect is
reviews really is that one year
so that would be determined by
the the ordinance.
This will figure out how does
this work knows we go local
ordinances as inspection only
gonna be at once a year two
years three years in here in
this exception we're putting
over a specific period of time
so conservative bill more the
other well those press specify
in statute.
As opposed to leaving that to
the order.
Is there without the amendment
is there anything in the bill
that would preclude.
The local government from
including this type of
exception.
here I I think the local
government could include I think
it was this was flagged thank
you bye the dealers and.
The fact that it all these
vehicles would be right back in.
You know two years later
again it did seem like something
that that we will deposit for
for new for new vehicles I think
it's it's pretty obvious that
you don't need to immediately
expect a brand new vehicle this
is defined as dealers
so it would also include.
A used car lot
again.
Well on the amendment to other
discussion.
Mr chairman I think the.
The inspection requirements and
health care.
So maybe the amendment fits in
with what Sir what happening in
the largest county in the state.
What else.
But for the proposed amendment
no further discussion is there
any objection to the adoption to
seven forty eight.
I see none of the amendments
adopted on the bill as amended
center workers
We've got.
To propose registered
and then Molly willingly we have
one opponent three fourteen is
do you have of any other party
your presentation
so whether you've got yeah
really you start with the
amendment so about we give you
five minutes to advocate.
They will go to the proposals
I'm happy to do that I think
also the City of Santa Fe did
submit Mr Billington on
Wednesday I'm not sure if he's
here did submit a statement in
support
and certainly if he's here he
I've got the email to the
Judiciary Committee this call
just be brief and and again
certainly council Romero Wirth
can also state.
One of the need for this from a
local ordinance of perspective
first of all this is not
creating any program it's it's
basically giving those five
class A. counties the option of
doing an inspection programs
Senator Stewart said the since
the Bernalillo Santa inspection
program for years and as a
result of that just got clean
air in Albuquerque it's really
works
on on that I think center city
Lopez actually it's been a
member of that board and worked
on that so here in Santa Fe
again there's been lots of
complaints about modified
exhaust systems and the noise
and so this is one more effort
to give the local government
should they decide to do it the
option to put in place an
inspection program I would note
that
many states have done inspection
programs are our neighbors to
the east in taxes every year
every vehicle has to get
inspected we're not proposing
that here this is a very
specific local option to give
the the local government the
opportunity to have that
discussion that debate and if
they decide to proceed forward
then at that point it would be a
program similar I think to what
you know the Albuquerque program
is targeted towards here but the
fact the state's already work
with Albuquerque Bernalillo on
that I think means the state is
in a position where it could
also do something along those
lines if a local government
elected to move forward.
And I just deal quickly to
coming up two minutes left.
Councilman or.
Thank you Mr chair as US senator
Wirth noted this has been a
problem in Santa Fe but I think
it's a it's a problem across the
state and really across the
country we're seeing more loud
vehicles they are disrupting the
peace and we are looking at
multiple ways to try to address
this problem I think this is one
way of trying to solve it which
is to suggest that vehicle be
inspected to make sure that the
muffler is not modified in a way
that creates excessive noise and
it serves a dual purpose of
looking for other safety issues
on a vehicle bringing up kind of
the level of the vehicle
so that it's safe in many other
ways like a cracked windshield
like other things mirrors
perhaps are broken tail light
Senator out other things that
might be identified as making a
vehicle less than a lot of a
certain standard we had I I
believe you know at the at the
city and county level local
governments elected officials
are sensitive to the same things
you all are around people's
ability to.
Keep their vehicles to a certain
level some folks that may be
more of an issue than others and
we will look at ways to make
sure that these things are not
really onerous or
overly expensive so I think we
are sensitive to a variety of
demographics and constituencies
that would have to apply who
would have to comply but I do
think this is a problem of such
a level that it demands more
attention and more
policy to help address it thank
you Mr chair thank you members
of the committee.
Right we had registered merry
merry Kate
Kate.
Yes regulation for two minutes
for some of the presentation.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is Mona K. I'm a
lifelong resident of New Mexico
and I do support SB forty eight
as we heard from senator Wirth
and counselor Romero Wirth I
also understand the concern of
those who may oppose this bill
because of the possible
additional costs place on lower
income residents but as a
supplies only to losses cities
and counties I do feel the
local officials understand our
constituents needs and was
certainly offers systems for
those in good faith who could
not fix the broken windshield or
the brakes or broken muffler
simply because they do not have
the funds but with that said
owning a car is a personal
financial responsibility and
should we go back to the days in
New Mexico and drivers that was
optional I remember on car
insurance was hit and miss.
so.
We should just allow somebody
with fabrics to keep driving
what kind of an accident might
that calls and also the noise of
school ation from the mufflers
has become so extreme.
Of these are well fully modified
mufflers they do cost people
money to install on just does
the analyst tanks of gas to
drive around at all hours of the
night destroying our peace and
quiet in our neighborhoods.
So I also think this is going to
take some burden off our police
force this way you know there's
another step before they have to
stop and stop somebody as we
know all of traffic stops have
the potential to become violent.
So I urge you to support this
bill thank you okay thank you.
Chairman another committee
members thank you I'll be brief
because what I have to say is
very redundant but I would like
to say that my car is seventeen
years old.
I am retired and my income does
not ring any high income bills.
Never the less I can afford to
have it inspected it's inspected
every time I change the oil
brakes exhaust signal lights
tire tread are all part of that
inspection and I'm sure that my
auto will pass I would like to
note that all the other cars on
the road also passed inspection.
Thank you.
Position.
This.
His organization.
We administrative to the.
I'm I think three that's okay.
Yes legislators so that out
there real quick give an extra
minute.
With the with the.
Thank you.
Okay so I was trying to start up
monies Rick Martinez
you Senator faced morning
reserve anyway my rip there's
been no representation from
district three which is the
which is the lowest income of
the of the city so nobody from
the district is known about this
I've talked to many many
residents and they're just going
to shut this is as this bills
come up and no we stopped them
about this bill the there I
already in place and the size of
just really got up in place so
the police have know that they
could find these vehicles with
about my first know that they
can be of the find four for
their maybe that I want to
produce at the but the bears it
does nothing nothing to include
some of the the help for these
low income families.
Who can't fix their cars and the
their vehicles and useful to get
to work with if there's if
there's something wrong they
can't fix it they can get a
registration they can use their
vehicles this is something I see
no cause I know tail light is a
fix that suppliers are like two
hundred dollars if even if you
have a some of your cars so the
minutes those are really hard
and if any of these classic
counties in the county can come
up with the with the with the
with that anybody from outside
the state class a cause to come
in to set a fate and resistive
there there my first lousy what
and that really get much because
they're not is not affecting
them that's a that's a tough
thing and they come with a
broken windshields that's no
problem for that either you know
let me if
The.
Even though the drugs to
suppress the county and the
cities to work together so if
you have that then you have the
counties
not wanting poses bill but the
city will so and how is the the
tape database work and that's
something that really applaud
catches me so you know but every
every city and town this manual
has a problem hi Sarah Hobbs as
his problem is some is a smaller
does the have these people these
kids at about their with their
loud mufflers to fix that so so
this is current isn't really so
in the problem the this is the
state of New Mexico not state of
setting up the state of of
occurred not state licenses your
were born Farmington I'm just
saying that the the rules if you
want to set the rules of the
state all over the city all over
the state skews me for all New
Mexicans you know the to design
a role like this the rule to
that punishes those that that
total the the law and the ones
that.
The ones that do bill is kind of
different you know so you know
there's people that want to open
a lot of those people that don't
know me low but is that you look
at the same thing we just
cracked windshields and you know
so I just don't think minor
issues that and also the
mechanics or Google how do we
get to serve them to certify
exactly what they want so that's
kind of that's kind of a rough
there I just feel that that this
of this of or do this thing if
you're gonna do something like
this let's make it for the
hostal state so the whole state
facilities that Sorensen thank
you.
We have registered on the bill
the members of course.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess I
I I I found on page five lines
twenty one twenty three the.
The new facility assessment I'm
just curious about the improper
location of registration to
avoid expectation.
What's what's happening.
So I'm Mr chair Senator Stewart
so that is designed once when
someone in Santa Fe who lives in
Santa Fe goes and registers
their car in Sandoval County to
avoid inspection.
Of one more question I've tried
to remember the classic counties
are.
Can you just remind me with.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
Bernalillo Dona Ana Santa San
Juan and Santa Fe.
Thank you thanks for.
Of the one thing that I'm
sure you all have talked about
it but it's kind of like to know
the background do not including
seems to be clear mission
exhaust the inspection is.
The puzzle I have a little bit
later I would
like
loud noisy vehicles but we also
all of the a lot more trouble by
the exhaust it's going into the.
Those
I am.
Serves as a change what we do
we're we're talking about
electric vehicles with over here
what are the resources yeah love
does behind closed for the cost
of.
Of of of what into the
atmosphere then
you don't do anything to.
Of course that federal
standards.
By two vehicles so I guess you
talked about that and decided
not to do it here.
San Juan so I Mr chairman I
actually opened up that statute
two years ago when we did the no
more stringent air regulations
and in in our air quality
statute which applies across the
state that's where Bernalillo in
Albuquerque are granted the
specific authority as local
governments to address air
quality standards and when we
went in and opened up that
statue two years ago at the
request of the City of
Albuquerque we included diesel
because previously they couldn't
regulate diesel in for for air
so it's it's a different section
of the of the code I mean that's
something that we could
certainly look at I think that
the genesis of that statute in
Albuquerque was was a brown
cloud problem and that's that's
really where that was created
but that's really the the reason
for that this is top of page
four vehicle noise inspection so
it's the noise versus the
exhaust.
Already require specials boards
off Mr Mr chair yes.
Years and.
You that passes to get your car
register.
So it comes in the mail you need
another inspection now for
getting your car registered it's
there like clockwork was anyway
but over to do.
Bernalillo Albuquerque New
Orleans Lafayette and they're
the only ones that have been
given the specific authority at
the local level to do it.
But what shocked at the.
Seven.
I'm not.
Senator cookies that.
Briefing the press.
I live in up.
It would also questions.
Motion
passes.
Photos.
What is.
Thank you Mr.
Through very impressed.
We're ready with.
The.
Through.
In the middle of the.
So.
All the.
Possible.
On the third line of the movie
was broken over consecutive.
And on the last hole line.
works.
We're changing.
And that.
That that.
You have.
Senator Stewart.
Some of the third line
afterwards Services sprite work
and I.
On the last line of work
sentence string that is sort of
the.
So that I would say if the
offender serving sentences for
convictions arising from
multiple cases the time kind of
corporal eligibility for a
particular case does not begin
to accrue until the sentence for
that case is being served that
takes care of both concurrent
and consecutive with that what
change do this for the yes that
is a friendly amendment Mr
chair.
Transaction.
This has.
The description of that action
Mr and I just I really want to
call out none of the work that
Senator Lopez has done this this
year which has been tremendous
with all different things coming
out but miss Wilson from the
ACLU has reached out and talked
to victims.
And listen to and the and really
works to try to harmonize where
things are at and it is just
been
a really impressive
collaboration on an issue that
is incredibly emotional.
And that I just think that is we
recognized.
You.
You're the best.
Thank you.
Actually.
Thank you Mr chair.
so we have the the secretary of
state is joining us yes zoom I
know we don't have the screen
set up that I believe will be
available for audio at least
but I have here with me director
Lindsay boffin from her office.
But on Senate bill one eighty
should look awfully familiar to
us all because it's essentially
just a pared down version of
Senate bill six from last
session
and all of the the issues that
are dressed in this bill on stem
from from actual experiences of
election administrators that
they've been navigating other in
the last couple of election
cycles and and are still
continuing to to deal with these
are non partisan technical
changes that are needed to
provide clarity for our location
election administrators so they
can efficiently and uniformly
administer our publicly funded
elections here in New Mexico I
will very quickly just kind of
hit some of the high notes of
what this this bill is doing.
so one of the things this does
is it moves the the date to
reopened the the registration
books to the Monday following
the county campus as opposed to
where it is currently which is
thirty five days after election
day it creates a uniform here
right for election board members
and also increases the cap on
what they can be paid on
election day right now it's two
hundred dollars it increases
that to four hundred dollars
which is really crucial because
these these are folks who are
working incredibly long days
into incredibly hardworking
and we want to make sure that
they're decently competent so
that they can come back and keep
doing.
it reinstates
so a lot of timelines that this
body adopted temporarily in
twenty twenty especially around
us to balance to ensure that
they are delivered timely and
that they get back to the county
clerk's and timely way as well.
and also
It codifies imprisoned
distinguishing that procedure
street quest voter data and
election information when it
contains information that's
about are not our that that's
critical to our on election
infrastructure and also voters
personal information.
And.
Again it also again from the
temporary measures that would
often twenty twenty it it
reinstates additional security
and administrative improvements
for absentee ballots as far as
preprocessing of those ballots
by county clerk staff and giving
voters on an opportunity to
secure if they've left some of
left let's say left information
off of their Attar envelope and
it also adds in the the use of
social security and the last
four of social security on with
the absentee ballots to verify
your identity which increases
security.
And.
It provides for post election
voting systems tax tax and after
every statewide election as
opposed to now where those only
happened after general
elections.
Hey it's requires that an
election that notification
mailer is sent to voters prior
to every election so they have
all the information they need to
fully participate it requires
mandatory training for calendars
and watchers since conducted by
the county clerk using
curriculum and resources that
are provided by the secretary of
state.
And it there's.
It makes permanent and election
security program that that
actually already exists at the
secretary of state's office that
will codify that so that that
remains going forward.
And establishes the use of voter
convenience centers in all
counties which is really than
the trend ever since they first
started in two thousand eleven
and again it's something that we
did in are you on that before I
was here I am twenty twenty as a
temporary measure
and finally I when the last kind
of high points is that it
reduces a nominating petition
signature requirements for
judicial candidates statewide
judicial candidates and for
folks running for PC by a by a
third because right now those
the signature requirements are
really high for those offices
and and it one we want judges
working their dockets not out
collecting signatures and not
for PC it's really hard to get
people to run because this
system signature thresholds are
so high with that I will.
If Misbach wants to say anything
briefly but we have a couple of
county clerks here who have come
up for a couple of days I wanna
make sure they get a chance to
to speak I called us all to
limit their comments to normal
no more than one minute
But now as senator thank you
chair all all state is I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this forward these are many
changes that that election
administrators have sought
before you all for for years now
in addition to changes that you
fight opted in twenty twenty and
and supported in in twenty
twenty two and I think the
sponsor for her work with both
the clerks and the secretary of
state's office in the drafting
of this bill.
So Mr chair we can go to their
county clerks or Senator yeah
you've got we've got the number
of people that are registered of
ms Clark miss masters Mr Rana
miss Lopez us most Scotia so
will recognize I'm gonna have to
to keep us and we're going to as
everyone keep those covers two
minute math and then the give a
ten minute so you're giving them
more time than I would Mr chair.
So will they do ensure the will
probably pay attention from.
Five of the.
Miss Clark the the.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee I'm Katherine
Clark the Santa Fe county clerk
I have my County we I do support
this bill it has for of the
priorities of the clerk's
ability in this bill it's also
as the sponsor mentioned we've
seen it before and we liked it
then and we like it now so we
hope that you'll support this
bill and pass a four thank you
so much for your privative is my
essence I just messages on the.
She will be moved.
They have
some sort yes is my is this.
Yes in your address chairman and
I have.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is Naomi
Maestas I'm the county clerk to
Los Alamos County the comments I
made today with of my position
as such to be clear I'm not
speaking on behalf of the
civilian.
As accounts are quit ministers
of collections for Los Alamos
and has worked in the office
since two thousand five I would
like to express my support
Senate bill one eighty I don't
as it helps to streamline and
improve the efficiency of
administrative processes leading
to better outcomes for all
involved increases transparency
and officials see improve or
experience Senate bill one
eighty includes needed measures
that will assist in our ability
to continue to serve our
communities securely and
transparently supporting voters
ability to engage with the
democratic process I appreciate
senators do have continued
support of our offices and
sauces efforts in working with
the county clerk's around the
state I ask you to recognize the
need for these administrative
changes and support digestion a
great election administration
and our state by voting in favor
Senate bill one eighty thank you
for your time thank you posted
on the.
Two minutes later.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee good afternoon
sorry my name is Robert start of
the third the what can clerk I
am a class B. under County I'm
speaking in support of SB one
eighties solely as well County
clerk not just the clerk's
affiliate and I want to mention.
Senate bill one eighty well this
is my office like many others
administratively during election
and post election and I would
like to commend the sponsor for
being open to dialogue
suggestions and amendments and
hope it continues moving forward
thank you Mr chairman.
This is.
Two minutes ago.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members the committee Amanda
Lopez us doing an accounting
clerk I am here again
representing my County solely
and I have been here several
times in the last few weeks
really just and I want to
underscore it's not a short trip
right from southern New Mexico
as you know Mr chair but the
importance of this bill it
really has pushed me to to do
everything I could to come every
single time to speak in support
of it the common sense of day to
day work that we do is harder
without it we are asking you to
help ease the burden that we
have we gladly take it on we're
proud of the work we do but the
changes in here are and
ministration Lee something that
we need not something that we
want we would grace greatly
appreciate it moving forward
thank you.
Your.
Those are regrets.
Yeah.
Home home grow.
Russia you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Catherine
Christiana with New Mexico
counties the counties are remain
neutral on Senate bill one
eighty however it does contain
critical components that the
bill has voted as a provided
sorry the board has voted as a
legislative priority
specifically the piece
addressing a press the clerks
have been inundated with
requests can't even get through
their election cycle and we
think the sponsor for clearly
defining how it relates to
elections.
You know that concludes all the.
Register details.
Loan include time for the
Opposition.
There is a group that's
identified as an organized
opposition is there a
spokesperson for the organized
opposition you're the
spokesperson yes all right I'm
sorry what was from the state.
Misco three are you gonna be the
one who's going to.
Recognize and control the time
of all the opponents.
Yes Sir I will attempt to roll
the.
Thought about attending them in
the there's an organized
opposition to what I do is for a
greater amount of time well time
restriction of there's not then
then what I would do is give
everybody on the opposition to
minutes okay thank you yes I'd
advise the people I have
opposition that they may have
one to one and a half it was at
the
Pleasure of the chair.
So we'll start with you miss
because we and then we have this
Curtis
hard Daniels more of debtors and
Fred thank you and we'll do that
or recognize a room for the to
see more than they have yes Sir
go ahead.
Thank you chair Senators my name
is Ramona goals be and I'm here
in opposition of Senate bill one
eighty I am not a representative
of either party I am just like
twenty five percent of the other
New Mexicans I'm a decline to
state New Mexico managed to
disenfranchise forty eight
percent of the registered voters
in this last election let's ask
ourselves why why do voters
still apathetic I've had the
opportunity to ask voters this
question in many different
settings and just answers the
same my vote doesn't count the
current in the current system I
tell them every time don't give
up always vote it's a road right
that you have earned I have
worked as a medical provider at
the VA in Albuquerque NM a
veteran myself there were
veterans telling me of witness
to regularities and I asked them
why didn't you report it and
they tell me it makes no
difference there were over
eleven thousand two hundred
forty three email sent to you
today in opposition of this bill
does that sound like the voters
want this bill.
One of the most important rights
is the right to vote one of the
best ways to give people
confidence in the voting system
is to let them see the records
this bill begins the process of
hiding records from people it
takes away kind local control
many aspects of the elections
and begins moving control to the
state and federal government
elections have become big
business costing taxpayers
hundreds of millions of dollars
thank you for your time I will
you'll tell to miss Curtis.
Chairman Senator is a committee
members my name is.
My name is Laura Curtis and I'm
a resident of Bernalillo county
and the constituents of district
twelve I am adamantly opposed to
just be one eighty for the
reason that it violates state
and federal law.
Message of this bill will result
in the inability of the voters
to guarantee fair and honest
elections in the future it would
also guarantee that whatever
majority is in power at the time
of passing this law could
continue in power indefinitely.
In the event that corruption
exists in the election process
there would be no ability to
secure documents evidencing such
corruption among other things
this bill criminalizes
investigation of election data
legalizes ballot harvesting and
mandates counties to stop
counting in the middle of the
night.
This bill will make our
elections completely opaque to
public scrutiny leaving our
elections extremely vulnerable
to fraud thank you and thank you
for your service thank you.
R. Daniels.
Daniel San Miguel County.
In opposition to just be one
eighty I address the elephant in
the room.
This bill is nothing but an
attempt to legalize the theft of
the twenty twenty twenty twenty
two election.
Documented crimes were committed
and this is the cover up
attempt.
It's the cover up that always
get to.
Our first amendment protects our
freedom of speech which includes
a right to vote and have it
accurately counted.
Specifically our right to vote
means a US citizens right to
vote.
You have each sworn an oath to
protect the.
And to protect the constitution
against all enemies foreign and
domestic.
A vote for this bill.
Is not only a failure to protect
but it direct assault on the
constitution and the rights.
That is treason.
You might want to think again.
About your vote.
Because truth and justice will
prevail sooner than later I
thank you thank you Mr lord.
Your committee members I
strongly oppose SB one eighty
this bill has been characterized
as nonpartisan but it is exactly
the opposite the bill would
destroy election transparency
legalize ballot harvesting allow
people to register to vote
without providing your social
security number force counties
to use internet connectivity
electronic poll books which
haven't been certified since two
thousand eleven.
This is against state and
federal law and even common
sense.
You all read the three articles
that I emailed to you earlier in
the week.
You will know that they outline
very specific if not outright
corrupt activities perpetrated.
By some of SPD's authors.
I just be read the articles I
ask that you vote with common
sense I ask you to vote no.
You Fred.
I think it is.
Hi good afternoon I'm Fred bank
and I'm from Bernalillo county
and there's three reasons why
I'm against this bill the first
one is there are things that are
while the other three things the
reason why I'm mentioning things
these are not included in the
bill and these are huge issues
in our society today and one is
censorship.
Censorship is got to stop we
have in common government
officials who are engaging in
censorship it's got to stop.
And there needs to be a a a
discussion about that and
safeguards put in place where
New Mexicans are protected.
The second one is the removal of
the voting machines.
They are corrupted they are
built in communist China and I
think we know a lot about
communist China and how they
treat their people.
Those machines.
I have have up not been properly
certified in the elections it's
just all there is to it there's
been counter arguments to that
but in two thousand and
seventeen was the last time
those machines for checked.
The election assistance
commission.
has up at least two pages of
security patches that have not
been used on the New Mexicans
Sheens how can we run elections
with machines that are on secure
it's impossible this is a fraud
those machines have to be
removed.
And that needs to be part of any
legislation in order for me and
probably another fifty percent
of New Mexicans staff confidence
in the election thank you Mr.
Okay thank you very very good
for the but the state we could
limited time for opposition as
the proponents.
We were members of the
committee.
Representative.
This gentleman and
A lot of work is going to.
What is in Senate bill one
eighty or over.
I do want to address.
Some of the things that have
been set.
because there the record
certain.
And and also to they don't they
don't match with.
The actual facts thanks.
Well there's there's nothing in
this bill that authorizes ballot
harvesting.
Just the opposite we maintain
the rural New Mexico.
Then unless you have a
relationship with the voter you
cannot take their ballot.
To the to drop it off or or to a
public place.
ballasting is when you
authorize people who don't have
relations with the.
To go and pick up ballots.
That is not provided for in this
bill.
That is not provide for New
Mexico all.
The people books have been
certified.
And the public's are not
regulated by the voluntary
voting system guidelines of the
federal elections sis's
Commission.
Try to equate the VVS cheese.
To kind of certification
apartment on the public's.
Is a red herring because it just
simply doesn't apply.
The yes she's.
Regulate the tabulators not the
public's.
Is this bill is trying to make
its way through.
The legislature I've been.
Dont with the award of.
Most Representative center in
New Mexico.
And the although I I haven't
gotten a trophy up for that but
I really think I should have.
If that's the case.
But the thing is that again the
the article written by.
Mr hopped.
It's filled with inaccuracies.
And.
it does it suggest that there
was some kind of.
Driver that took place between
me and the sponsor of the bill.
That was not the case
it suggests that.
I made a contribution to her
campaign.
I didn't.
The campaign committee.
Associated with by campaign did.
Let's be clear that was not that
those are not funds.
That came from me.
Those are not funds that came
from a company that I'm
associate.
and that was glossed over.
In the in that process.
There is also discussion about
about the presume.
Corruption in the Dona ana
county clerk's office.
And that somehow there was there
was a
Some of that there that that the
part of this bill.
Is in order to cover up things
that have happened in the Dona
ana county clerk's office.
The reality is is that.
Through ballot of comments which
are provided for the election co
to continue to be provided for
in the election code.
Between inspections of people of
gonna do where they have looked
at the ballots in Dona ana
county down an account actually
has has received more scrutiny
than any other county in the
state.
And the and if there's there is
nothing that has been shown.
about improprieties.
In the administration of
elections and done in a county
nor anything that affects the
outcome of elections and Dona
Ana County.
it is.
Up it is really disconcerting.
To.
To hear some of the complaints
are being made.
In terms of in terms of the
predicate upon which they're
being made.
Because the predicate upon which
they're being made generally
quite candidly is is just it's
not factual.
And it's not active.
The.
This this bill.
As as a sponsor said.
at the beginning.
Most of this bill comes from
last year Senate bill six.
Last year Senate bill six.
Of the five names Sanchez on
that bill three of them
Republicans.
and so this is also not a
partisan bill.
And and so it is I think it's.
I think it's important for
people to recognize.
That.
We have an election process and
it's our job to guarantee the
process.
It's not our job to guarantee
the outcome.
I agree completely that we
should not pass laws to
guarantee the outcome.
But one of the things that we
need to remember is that process
procedures.
Our neutral.
We want to.
No excuse absentee balloting in
the
Heather Wilson.
Lost on election night is back
when we did struck out in the
US develops until
Lost on election night.
And we all woke up the next
morning issues comparable to
get.
Into the.
Then the folks came in whether
microtargeting.
And they figured out how to best
Republicans are doing and this
development process.
And now actually balloting is
considered to be a progressive
process.
Asked about is neither it's a
process.
It's a process that's available
for anyone to use fairly within
the system.
M. and so likewise.
What's what's in this bill.
Thanks that there are procedures
here.
They are their procedures.
That could be used fairly by
either side.
But what I don't think is
addressed here is the amount of
election security that's also
included in this bill.
The amount of accountability on
the county clerk's.
And the secretary of state's
office that is also included in
this bill.
and and so you know I just.
I've.
There's a there's a conversation
with the people earlier today
not not deal with this bill.
The where there's conversation
about the fact that for for
whatever reason these days
people disagree about something
they provide the need to make it
personal.
And we can disagree about things
we don't have to make a
personal.
Without question people's
motives.
But instead keep it on the on
the merits of the words on the
page.
And and that's what we should be
doing.
And and so anyways I just I just
want to make that statement in
terms of in terms of some of the
noise that just happened
surrounding this bill some of
the misinformation that has
taken place surrounding this
bill.
And
So that because.
Like I said this is.
The genesis of this bill
happened when.
Groups of county clerks.
Of urban and rural New Mexico of
democratic and Republican
counties came together around
the table to talk about what was
needed in the election process.
And what remained in the bill or
things that the county clerk's.
Of urban and rural counties and
Republican and democratic
counties.
Agreed needed to be part of the
election process.
So
you know it's.
At a rate I just like I said I
just I just felt that needed to
be said and
Thank you Mr.
Thanks for.
Thank you Mr chairman after.
Living through and voting for
this bill last year and I think
even the year before
that do pass.
Discussion.
Will you pass motion is there
any objection seeing the Senator
Ivey Soto store o'neill to serve
this we're putting the for the
past.
Committee is access we will let
me to model single Monday
afternoon.
