The only time I remember ever
having only one bill on our
agenda in this committee, um,
and that's because we want to
assure we have given this the
time that we think we need to
ideally get it out of the
committee today. We've spent a
lot of time with it in the last
couple of days. We got it from
you all Monday, I think, right?
So you have 3 weeks to work on
this. We've, we've had less than
3 days, so we may, uh, we may
not be as sharp as you all are
on the details and so you'll
help straighten this out on a
little bit, but go ahead, um,
representative Chandler.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm,
I'm sorry to read it for you so
quickly. Yeah, yeah, so you, I
assume that you're familiar with
the rules of the committee here,
and we allow a block of time for
advocacy, you can reserve part
of that for rebuttal, but I
don't know, do we have a sign-in
sheet of proponents. So we've
got um what we call a
coordinated advocacy with.
24, 67 or so people who've uh
signed in in advance to speak
and support JD Bollington and
others. You may have this list,
I assume, and the the reason I'm
taking the time to explain this
for you representative is I
really rely on you to cut short
your speakers, so, um, if you've
got 7 people in here, I'm
relying on you to coordinate
them. Does that make any sense?
Uh because JD Bullentin will
talk for all of 15 minutes, um,
and, and not allow anybody else
on the list to speak and so we
really, I just turned, what I'm
doing is I just turned the 4
over to you entirely, and that
means, uh, cutting people off or
recognizing them and so forth,
unless they're not part of your
presentation and they're not,
then we allow them very limited
amount of time.
Mr. Chair, uh, as much as I love
JD Bullington and a number of
the other people who are
probably on the list. They are
not part of my presentation, I
believe they just come to
express support, Mr. Cha, so
feel free to limit their
comments as you deem fit. I'll
just know who they are, um, Miss
Meredith Macken, uh, commander
Gerald Bartlett, Jim Jackson,
Ellen Pine's Gloria Darity, and
Dale Wagner or a representative
for the state police, so um if
they're not, none of those are
part of your presentation, then,
is that right?
No, Mr. Chair. All right. So uh
what we'll do, representative,
is we'll, we'll recognize you
for up to 12 minutes for your
presentation, and then I'll
leave you 3 minutes for a
rebuttal at the end and we'll
let all these people have a
minute or two, OK?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
not sure I even really need 12
minutes, um, the, this bill, um,
represents a house bill, House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 represents a
compilation, is that a word of
about 6 bills that have been
through the house's vetting
committee process and um we're
passed off the floor, um,
recently.
House Bill 4 is a criminal
competency bill, which um I was
a sponsor on as were you Mr.
Chair.
The bill
Improves upon a very old
competency statute by doing a
few things. One is it's expands
upon the predicate crimes that
may be considered when one is
being evaluated for criminal
commitment and I know all of you
know this, but criminal
commitment is a process where
when competencies is raised and
the person is deemed um not
competent.
Um, and not restorable if that's
an appropriate word, Mr. Chair.
Then there is a criminal
commitment process that um
observes the due process rights
of the individual. So we
expanded on the crimes that can
be looked at to determine
whether or not the person is
deemed dangerous for the
purposes of criminal commitment.
In addition, it adds really kind
of a new concept, Mr. Chair,
where in individuals who are
charged with nonviolent felonies
and misdemeanors, but when
competency is raised, we provide
options that currently do not
exist. Under current law, if
someone is charged with a
nonviolent felony, a
misdemeanor, and that
incompetencies raised, the
person's evaluated and if that
person.
Is deemed not competent.
The case is dismissed, um,
that's the process that's
currently employed, and that
frustrates many people. So what
we have done is allowed for
community, um, outpatient
restoration as a possibility for
someone, meaning that person
might be able to be restored and
then tried for the crimes for
which they are charged, or that
the case may be dismissed, and I
district attorney may file for a
civil proceeding for um a
assisted outpatient treatment or
follow a current process or um
civil commitment. I would make
one last point about the bill
that it does, it expands on the
competency evaluation so that if
someone chooses to pursue, for
example, assisted outpatient
treatment. They have some
foundational information from a
healthcare provider that would
assist in that proceeding, Mr.
Chair, so that's the sum total,
I think pretty much of what they
um criminal competency bill.
What originally house built for,
then we have 5 other bills,
House Bill 31 was incorporated
into this bill, wherein we um
increase um a shooting threat
from a misdemeanor to a 4th
degree felony.
We have um a fentanyl
trafficking bill originally
House Bill 16, which um provides
for the potential of enhanced
penalties if certain quantities
are found and the person is
determined to be trafficking.
Um, we have house Bill 106,
which um provides a process for
a blood draw for a misdemeanor
DWI under current law.
Um, there is no provision for um
obtaining a warrant for a blood
draw on a misdemeanor DWI and
this, this law, this bill, um,
would provide for that and allow
uh an officer to seek a warrant
and um perform a blood draw on a
misdemeanor, um.
DWI. And lastly, um, we, we
incorporated House Bill 1 House
Bill 50.
Which
I guess you could say sets up a
structure where in certain auto
theft type crimes can be
aggregated um for the purposes
of determining whether or not
there's a
Prior conviction. Help me with
the terminology. My expert is
Megan Dorsey.
That's your chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
that is true in House Bill 50 we
create an internally enhancing
statute whereby predicate crimes
of auto theft when committed in
different ways can serve as
prior convictions for internal
enhancement purposes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and that
is um the summary of the bills
that are contained in House Bill
8.
Thank you, chair, and, uh, let's
see you mentioned that, so
you've got competency
incorporated, you said 5 other
house bills and some fashion or
the other. Is that right? Um,
Mr. Chair, that's correct.
I was one Ianyl, fentanyl was
the 2nd, uh, blood draw was a
3rd, the auto theft was the 4th,
it was the 5th.
Clock switch. I did not mention
the Glock switch, which is House
Bill 38, which um makes a state
crime out of something that is
currently a federal climb, which
is to possess, um, and enhancing
device on a, on a
On a firearm that turns it from
a semi-automatic um weapon to a
automatic weapon, that's illegal
under federal law, but law
enforcement came to us and
requested that we um enacted in
state law so that they could
actually enforce it that the
federal government, the federal
um law enforcement is overtaxed
and are not pursuing many of
these cases.
Singing to the choir, I made the
lock switch, right, so we've
seen that and that's really
pretty horrific thing for a
couple of years now. Um, so
we've incorporated the 5, we've
got them, uh, you've used only
about 6 minutes, so we have some
time for the other individuals
who signed up, unless you have
Miss Dorsey, you have anything
you want to add?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I think that
Representative Chandler
accurately summarized the bills.
The only thing I will add is
that this compilation of
proposals was very carefully
considered in the house to
strike a balance between
recognizing the need to protect
the members of our community
from violent crimes and drugs
and DWIs while also recognizing
the need to protect nonviolent
offenders struggling with mental
health disease.
And I'll add to that, I'm sure
an attachment and consideration
for the US and state
constitution, right, and the
protections that are afforded by
those constitutions, of course.
Uh, so we'll get to those and,
uh, spend some time talking
about this in some detail. Thank
you again. We worked during the
interim, and I appreciate you
all involving me and allowing me
to co-sponsor this with you. Um,
we have, uh,
Individuals who I mentioned, we
can recognize each of them for a
minute and stay within our time
parameters, so Mr. Bollington,
you have a minute and you're on
Zoom is my understanding, is
that right?
Mr. Bullington.
No.
Mr. Bollington, you've been
recognized for a minute.
But you may be muted or we're
not hearing anything from you.
There you go. I'm gonna mute it
now. OK? 30, 45 seconds of your
minute.
I'll be
thank you, Mr. Chairman JD
Bullington, speaking on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, which
strongly supports House Bill 8
while the chamber would still
like to see greater penalties
for felons who use firearms and
It still believes we need to
reworking of the Children's code
to address violent youth. The
chamber is especially encouraged
to see changes made to the
criminal competency piece
included. The chamber is also
very much encouraged to see
sentence enhancements for those
trafficking in fentanyl. This
provision's going to go after
the dealers, not those afflicted
by the addiction. And lastly,
Mr. Chairman, within my time
limit.
The Chamber of Commerce is very
pleased to see efforts to crack
down on auto theft. This is a
vexing problem that runs rampant
in Albuquerque and needs higher
penalties for repeat offenders,
so we applaud the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, write it one minute.
Uh, League of Women voters?
Smaking
Are you here?
Not on Zoom, no.
All right, uh, commander
Bartlett.
I am Commander Gerard Bartlett
from the Albuquerque Police
Department and I oversee our
Christ intervention division.
And today I want to speak on
behalf of Albuquerque Police
Department in support of this
bill and the other measures
within this bill. Um, we spend
the majority of our time in
Christ's intervention, working
with those in our community who
are experiencing mental health
crises or those in our community
who are just in general, high
utilizers of public safety
services, so we're very
encouraged uh by the information
in this bill.
Thank you, thank you for being
succinct. Jim Jackson, are you
here? We are, yes.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
disability rights in New Mexico.
Uh, we do stand in support for,
uh, most of what's the, the
competency provisions that are
now in House Bill 8,
particularly establishing some
community-based competency
restoration programs. This will
spare people the trauma of
having descent to the forensic
unit at the state hospital in
Las Vegas, uh, and provide this
kind of service on a local
level. We don't have that
capacity, uh, yet, but.
Um, if we can develop that, I
think it'll be really useful. We
just hope that there won't be a
like a backlog because, uh,
these are still just being stood
up. The uh treatment as a chair
as uh Madam Chair and the
sponsor had indicated the
treatment in this uh bill is
primarily to restore people to
confidence so that they can be
prosecuted and, and we get that,
but we are, uh, hopeful that
there will be other provisions
such as the one in Senator
Doig's Bill Senate Bill 54 that
just heard yesterday, it creates
a new pathways for diverting
people who have mental illness
out of the criminal justice
system altogether and get them
into the treatment that they
want. Thank you very much,
chair.
Thank you, Ms. Pines.
I'll see. OK, I don't see her
either. Uh, Gloria Doherty.
You're recognized for up to a
minute, ma'am. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Gloria Doherty, and I'm
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Nursing Association and the New
Mexico Nurse Practitioner
Council. We would thoroughly
like to thank all of the
sponsors for bringing this
forward.
Hopefully it will help with the
numerous healthcare assaults
that even myself has experienced
as a nurse for over 35 years
that never even make it to the
system. We're sorry that we
didn't catch these things sooner
though. There may be some
confusion related to the
language and blood draws,
generally speaking, physicians
do not draw blood, and those
listed are all licensed except
for technologists.
There are also two sections in
the bill where there's mention
of a prescribing physician when
the prescriber, particularly in
our rural areas, maybe a
psychiatric nurse practitioner,
a nurse specialist, or a
prescribing psychologist, all
which are approved in this bill
to to complete the evaluations.
Once again, I'm sorry that we
did not catch this quicker, and
we'd like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this. Thank you.
Uh, Deputy Chief Wagner.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Joe Wagner.
EPS strongly supports the bill
in its current form, passed on
the house.
Particularly the provision
concerning version.
This bill aligns to Mexico law
with federal law.
Which is crucial step in
enhancing public safety.
We firmly believe that the mere
possession.
These devices in is inherently
dangerous.
It only takes a matter of
seconds to attach a conversion
device.
a firearm
Instantly transforming a
semi-automatic weapon into a
fully automatic one.
Just keep this capability
significantly.
Significantly increases the
potential for harm and poses a
serious
threat to the safety of our
communities, actually.
Officer
Thank you. Thank you.
Chief could always see you
become regular over here,
because they really, it's good
to have you.
Uh, either Carla or Larry, we're
going to opponents.
And I've only got 3 who signed
in in advance to register so I
have Carlo or Larry Sontag, um,
his uh Neezer, is that right?
And Mone Silva do I
see
answers for any of the three of
you. Uh, OK, we've got a couple
of you here.
All right, uh, I don't see Carl
or Larry Sontag, I think Zoom,
all right.
Uh, who's up there, Larry
Sontag, you're recognized for 2
minutes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee,
Larry Sontag here representing
the New Mexico Business
Coalition in opposition to this
House Bill 8 as it's currently
presented. We appreciate the
sponsor's efforts and there are
some good parts, but it fails to
fully address the crime crisis
in our state.
This omnibus bill combining
several of the bills, takes a
weak approach to crime. It looks
like in many cases it's
prioritizing leniency over
accountability at a time when
New Mexicans are demanding
stronger action. We have proof
New Mexico Business Coalition
recently did a study and 94%
agreed that repeat offenders
should be charged with violent
crimes and held for trial that
is not addressed in this bill.
There's other strong
Statistics from all walks of
life, all parties, all ages, New
Mexicans want tough crime bills
passed, not a watered down
omnibus bill. For that reason
and others we
oppose this bill and ask you to
do as well. Thank you.
Thank you, er.
I pronounce your name right?
Bowen, thank you.
You're recognized up to 2
minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members and
representatives. My name's
Doctor Bronwyn Easter and I'm a
forensic psychologist. I was
previously the competency
evaluator contract manager for
the state and have been
practicing in mental health
policy, work here in New Mexico
for the past 3 years. And
speaking in opposition of HB 8
on the sole grounds of the
criminal competency and
treatment bill previously HB 4.
I've given the sponsors in
previous committees amendments
that consider the evaluators
will be doing this work and up
until this point, none of those
concerns have been addressed. To
me, this is a blatant disregard
of the professionals who will be
adding a tremendous burden to
their already cumbersome
evaluation process. If any
legislator had bothered to reach
out to the contract evaluators,
they would have understood the
number of evaluators with
concerns.
Out of the 12 evaluator
contracts in the state, 10 of
the 12 are opposed to this bill.
Those those contracts cover 25
of the 27 evaluators doing this
work.
These are some of the main
concerns. The lack of support
and obtaining necessary records
to complete these evaluations,
the lack of immunity or support
for the from the state to civil
decision making, the lack of
additional compensation for, for
the additional evaluations and
testimony requirements, which no
comment has been made about
additional funds provided to
this contract to account for
this, and the unsealing of
competency evaluations in
general.
Statutorily requiring competency
evaluators to do this work
without their consultation will
result in the loss of evaluators
and possible DOJ lawsuit for the
lack of timely evaluations,
which was, which we have seen
across the country in which our
neighbor Colorado is still
dealing with.
Finally, other states with
similar competency systems have
tried marrying competency and
civil commitment and have had to
walk this back in legislation
due to the back to the
bottleneck in both criminal and
civil dockets. This information
was also provided to the
sponsor. We have current
functional statutes for both
civil commitment and AOT that
are simply underutilized. I'd be
happy to have further
conversations with any of you,
if you would like more robust
information regarding this.
Thank you. Thank you, doctor.
Uh, Mone Silva.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Monee
Silva and I'm speaking today on
behalf of the Public Safety
Coalition, which is made up of
11 member organizations who have
joined forces to advance
community-centered public
policies in New Mexico during
the 2025 legislative session.
The coalition is disappointed
seeing this package of bills
which focused on new crimes,
increased punishment, and forced
hospitalization.
Well, these policies are being
disguised as public safety
package. We know that these are
not approaches that keep our
community safe.
New New Mexicans deserve root
cause solutions, not worn out,
ineffective, tough on crime
policies.
Policymakers should prioritize
preventative measures to address
public safety and homelessness,
including investments in
education, health care, housing
rather than investments and
incarceration and punishment.
We all want to live in safe
communities and evidence shows
that the best solutions are
those that respect the rights,
dignity, health, and autonomy of
New Mexicans throughout our
state. Unfortunately, HBA does
not meet these requirements. We
urge you to vote no on this
bill. Thank you Silva. I thank
you all for those of you who
registered in advance and uh
help me keep on time with our
presentations in our, in our
business. I, I think before we
get to the committee, um, it's
important to note, and
especially for those of you that
are leaving a little bit too.
Uh, we're not halfway through
yet with this session, so any
concern by the Chamber of
commerce or other that were done
today with our efforts to
address the crime problem that I
think this committee in your, in
your committee knows very well,
and we've been, uh, dealing with
it throughout the interim in
preparation for a special
session before and since and
really long before that for
years before that too, so we're,
we're, don't count us out just
yet, uh, this is an effort to
address a very discrete and
specific issues, and I
appreciate the house getting us
started doing so.
I have a first for on the bill,
Senator Doig, and I know some
amendments are gonna be
considered for the committee.
Uh, it'll be my practice. I'm
sure it's probably yours too. I
will try and always remember to
ask you your, your thoughts on
any given um amendment, but if I
forget to do so, please jump in
and remind me that you'd like
to.
Express your your thoughts on
amendments. So Senator Doug,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Ms Dorsey. Um,
there's a lot of stuff I like in
here, um, I like that you are
keeping open, uh, the, uh, the
possibility of diversion, um,
and I, I really like your
approach to shooting threats.
Uh, we've seen other bills in
here that I really didn't like,
uh, and, and I'm.
I'm really comfortable with the,
the way you guys are approaching
that.
I have a couple of amendments
that, that I want to go through.
Um, most of them are really just
looking to clarify and
streamline, um,
There's one, I have a, a
Birchfield concern, and we'll,
we'll probably get to that one
last. Um, but, so on page 3,
You have starting at line 9, you
have the subsection B.
Uh, which is really saying that
if, if competency is raised
anywhere other than district
court, it gets moved to district
court. So that's what this
amendment would do, so.
It would be so on page 3, at the
end of line 10, striking that
colon.
Line 11 striking the 1 in
parentheses.
I didn't hear you. Sure. So,
page 3, end of line 10, striking
the colon.
Uh, at line 11, striking the 1,
so we're gonna make this just
all one paragraph.
Um
And then at the end of line 12,
striking oar on 13 striking a
metropolitan court.
And then on line 14 and after
court inserting a period.
And then striking everything
after that period through line
18.
So how it would read is, unless
the case is dismissed upon a
motion of the party or through
diversion.
Actually, comma.
Uh, if a question of a
defendant's competency is raised
in a court other than a district
court, the case shall be
transferred to the district
court, period.
So I think that retains what
what you're going for at that.
Just shortens it.
Are we asking if that's a
friendly? It's a friendly. OK.
So I'll move that a minute.
Streamline things.
longer and longer,
get older and older, we're
looking for laws that are
shorter and shorter, you know,
less, less, less reading for all
of us, so we're taking this and
consolidating it down. So on
that that's a proposed
amendment, and will you still
with us on it? All right, good.
Uh, commitments all together on
this, OK, on the amendments that
are my.
It's the sponsor said it's
friendly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Representative
Chandler, Senator De.
So essentially, um,
We're taking up
I, I like the way it's written
now, frankly, as the waste right
now, it doesn't refer to
magistrate courts.
But essentially if you're a
magistrate court, a municipal
court.
Any other court that I can't
think of, it goes to district.
But if you're a metropolitan
court, which is, there's only
one in the state, as we all
know, Mr. Chairman in Berne
County.
They're all lawyers, they've
been dealing with competency to
evaluations.
Um
You know, I think in the smaller
towns, some of the criticism is
that well we know that is not
competent, we're not gonna
bother arresting him in
Albuquerque that you may not
know folks as much.
Anyway, I think Metro Court is
perfectly capable and, and much
more efficient at determining
competency and then on line 17,
it says if the defendant is not
confident.
In Metro court, the case they'll
then be transferred to district
court, so.
I don't think we should transfer
to district court determine
competency, and then if they're
competent, send it back to
Metro.
So I just respectfully
Oppose the amendment.
Thank you. Others on the
proposed amendment.
Uh, Senator O'Malley, you're
looking puzzled, so you want,
you want a question on this?
I'm I'm reading your body a lot
these days, I told you that the
other day you're glaring at me,
I could, I could not play poker.
There's no question, um, of
course, you know, you've, we've
got attorneys here and they're
all, you know, arguing things
like, you know, this sort of
thing, so I just.
I, you know, I respect all of
you, but I just now they brought
up this question, I thought,
well, OK, we're cleaning it up
and then you bring up something,
Senator, Maestus, which is, you
know, seems to be valid.
So now I'm confused.
Let's just put it that way, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, Senator
Dude, you want to try and
explain your amendment maybe to
help satisfy Senator Wley and
and mindful of Senator Master.
Concern
Sure, so, Mr. Chair, senators,
I, I mean, I, I think Senator
Massis is right that it would be
taken Metro court out, out of
the game. Um, and it would be
having those, those
determinations made in district
court.
Um
So I think it is just a, it is a
question of what?
Where we think that is best,
best done.
So there's not necessarily a
right answer or a wrong answer,
I think on that. Yeah, so let me
try to take a stab at it. The
way, the way that you all had
written this was that if a
competency issue is raised in
any court other than
metropolitan court, and it's not
raising, it was not raised in
the district court, so it was
raised in the magistrate court
or a municipal court, it gets
transferred to district court,
and, and the way you had it
worded if it was raised in
municipal court there's or I'm
sorry in metro court, which is
the only one in Albuquerque,
that court would be in a
position to make a
determination.
And, um, and then um they could
refer it to district court and
I, I, Senator Maest is um a
little bit of a tweak. I mean,
there's, you're right, there's
only one metro court, but
realized Donana account, even
the magistrate court has all
lawyers, right? So, so the
argument is made that Metro
court should be able to do this
because it's all lawyers
arguably than the magistrate
court in Donana County should be
able to do it too, because
they're all lawyers as well too.
The the issue fundamentally
Senator O'Malley is should these
determinations be made at the
district court level, I think
that really is the fundamental
question right here.
they're doing saying all of
these would be determined at a
district court level. I think
the sponsor with the
clarification is still
supportive of that notion.
Senators is saying that the
metro court should be able to
make that determination without
the district court. I think that
really is the issue that's
before us in a nutshell.
Mr. Chair, yeah.
We, um
We still, we're still
comfortable with a Senator
Duhigg's suggestion. All right.
Other committee questions,
comments? Anyone else? Salley,
of course, of course.
So you're saying, uh, Senator
Moses that it could be either
district court or metro court,
or should it be this metro
course that that should be the
determination.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Senator, Senator O'Malley, I, I
just like the way it's written
now, and I, I did mention that
Metro courts all lawyers, but my
point is, is that it's just more
efficient to stay there instead
of sending it across the street.
They and metro.
If they're not competent, then
send it across the street.
But I think Metro, uh, is a
very, very efficient court, no
disrespect to the second
judicial, but
Metro is very, very efficient
and and many times more
efficient than the 2nd judi.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else?
On the proposed amendment, let's
just do a roll on the amendment.
Senator Brentley.
Uh, yes.
to here.
Beer O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
3
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Duke, you still have
the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so,
Senator or representative, um,
so on page 5.
Uh
I'm looking at this language
and, and when you're talking,
When you're talking about these,
these standards in the context
of the mental health and
developmental disabilities code.
Uh
We're talking about at least
drastic means principle.
Um, and then when we're talking
about in the AOT context we're
talking about uh least
restrictive appropriate
alternative.
And so I
I was like, what do those mean?
Um, I, I, I
So I was looking, doing, doing
my statue search, and so I see
that.
At least drastic means principle
is used in both the, in the, in
the mental health and
developmental disabilities. Oh,
you know what? Hold on, I'm
realizing something as I'm
talking. It is already defined.
So for the first part,
When we're looking at on page 5,
line 6. That is already a
defined term within that
statute. Um, so I was going to
say pursuant to incite the, the,
uh, the definition statute, but
I don't think that's necessary
there because it's in the same
statute. But then I was looking
at least restrictive restrictive
appropriate alternative.
And I, I was not finding a, a
good clear definition of that,
um, and so
you're looking at line 19 on the
page to the line
we're looking at the incongruity
senator between uh line 5 and 6
on that page and then line 18
and 19, that's where we got
bridge those and Mrs. Horsley
may have an answer to the
question here,
but is on page
yeah, yeah.
Joy, go ahead.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator, I'm
happy to respond to that.
In this section where we're
talking about what we've been
calling the expanded evaluation
this language both in lines 4
and 5 and 18 and 19 is pulled
directly from the parallel
statutes.
So these are, this is the exact
language that is in the statute
for civil commitment and the
exact language that is in
statute for Dorsey is,
is least restrictive appropriate
alternative to find in the OT
statute cause I, that's what I
wasn't finding. Um, I can check
for you quickly, but I, I can
say that I know that there is a
substantial body of case law
that has developed how the
courts interpret that, but
whether there's a statutory
definition or not.
I'd have to look up for you.
I'm looking it up right now as
we're talking.
Um, oh,
so that it could, and I hear
what you're saying, but, but,
oh, yes, go ahead. And
to clarify, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, you are looking for the
definition for least restrictive
means, least restrictive,
appropriate alternative,
chairman and senator, that's
defined in 30 43-1B2G least
restrict 43-1B
2 G as in gorilla.
Least restrictive appropriate
alternative means treatment and
conditions that
are no more harsh, hazardous, or
intrusive than necessary to
achieve acceptable treatment
objectives and do not restrict
physical movement or require
residential care such as
reasonably necessary for the
administration of treatment or
the protection of the patient.
So it is, it is the same
definition that that is given
for least dras drastic means
principle. So it's the same
standard, even though those
those two different terms are
used, the same standard as being
applied in both situations. OK.
That's what we, I wanted to make
sure of. And so, I will skip
that. So the reason we focused a
little bit on the, the different
definition or the terms which
are defined exactly the same
way, just two different terms
and two different parts of the
statute. I don't know who writes
this stuff, but um,
The, the, the question I've got
really is, uh, we want to make
sure that that definition that
we just went through for those
two different terms being the
same definition is consistent
with the goal of the legislation
itself because that definition
puts restrictions on ability to
confine.
Right? And so we're we're saying
that's the standard and we
define it by reference to that
standard, that standard says you
can't confine, are we creating
an avenue by some by which
somebody could challenge the the
statute, right, to say, hey, you
define these terms, they're
defined terms, and they say you
can't do this, uh, and I think
Ms Dorsey, I'm looking at you,
there's some language in that
definition that's kind of broad
that says, maybe you can, right?
Uh, could you, could you just
address that, that part of this,
this question. I hope you
understand what we're talking
about.
We're, we're trying to make sure
we're not defining terms
elsewhere in the statute
referring to them here and then
essentially writing ourselves
out of the goal of the bill.
Chairman, I I believe I
understand your question if I'm
following you.
Essentially, the committee is
seeking to ensure that this is a
constitutional bill that we're
passing that will not later be
subject to challenge that we
don't anticipate. There'll
always be challenged but
unanticipated challenge. Uh, and
my response to that, sir, is
that in pulling these
definitions from current statute
from the civil commitment
statute and from the AOT
statute, our intent is to to
direct the court to follow the
body of Ca saw that they've
developed around these currently
functioning statutes and that.
And because they are currently
functioning in statute in other
provisions. I don't see why that
would be different here the
definition you just gave to both
of these two terms to have, and
you could look at that language,
that definition. It has language
that relates to limitations on
confinement.
Right? In those in that
definition, you just read that
one section of the definition
again too.
Uh, I believe you're referring
to subsection G2, uh, means
treatment and conditions that do
not restrict physical movement
or require residential care,
except as reasonably necessary
for the administration of
treatment or the protection of
the patient. And that that
language at the end that says
unless reasonably necessary,
right? So that was our concern
is that the definition says you
can't confine, uh, but then it
goes on to say you can if
reasonably necessary. So I
think, I think we're OK. We
just, Senator Doogan and I know
we're concerned about.
You're exactly right. We don't
want to pass a statute that's
going to be successfully
challenged. I've been doing this
a long time, uh, this committee
is used to everybody always
coming and telling us they're
gonna sue us and challenge us
and challenge constitutionally,
they got to do it successfully,
so, uh, we want to make sure,
maintain a 100% record on this,
Senator Dewey.
And Mr. Chair.
Excuse me.
Turn my microphone off.
I do have one more question.
About the least drastic means
principle.
I know.
Um
Because I'm looking at that
definition in the mental health
and developmental disabilities,
and it also has a sub 3 which is
our conducted and suitable
available facility close to the
client's place of residence.
And so I wonder.
If what we're talking about here
is realistically, people get
sent to BHI in Las Vegas is
using that.
Is that going to create a
problem because what if there is
not a suitable available
facility close to the.
client's place of residence.
That would be required under
that definition. It's uh 431-3.
um D. I'm sorry, uh.
Chairman, Senator, can you
direct me to where you're
looking in the bill or I, I'm, I
just my follow up question. Yes,
sorry, it's uh page page 5 line
6, going back to that. Thank
you. Uh, least drastic means
principal language. It's there
in the, in the commitment
context.
So then, looking at the that
definition in in this statute,
the mental health and
developmental disabilities Code.
It has the, so it means
habilitation or treatment, and
the conditions of rehabilitation
or treatment for the client
separately and in combination,
one are no more harsh,
hazardous, intrusive than
necessary to achieve acceptable
treatment objectives. The client
too, involvement restrictions on
physical movement or no
requirement for residential care
except is reasonably necessary.
The administration of treatment
and the physical injury, but
then there's a 3.
That is, are conducted at a at
the suitable available facility
close to the client's place of
residence.
Is that going to cause a
problem.
Uh
Chairman, Senator.
Again, I'm, I'm not 100%
positive I'm following you, but
I'm gonna take a crack at it.
Correct me if I'm wrong, um.
What I think you're referencing
is where the services need to be
available if somebody is later
subject to a civil AOT order.
Please go ahead. No, Mr. Chair,
so, so this isn't under the AOT
portion. This is under the
The portion that's under the
The mental health and
developmental disabilities Code.
A civil commitment. Right.
OK
that the language.
5 and 6
Yes, yes. So are you staying
with me, Ms. Dorsey and Senator
Representative, sorry, you were
looking at that standard that's
on lines 5 and 6 and the
definition there, which would
suggest that you can only apply
that definition when you're
specifying the location for the
treatment. I think that's what
you're getting at.
It is I, I just worry that if
there is not.
I mean, and I mean, there's a
little wiggle room with the, the
word available in there, but.
But if there is not a suitable
available facility close to the
client's place of residence.
I, I wonder if that's gonna
cause cause hangups and
appliances.
Because that standard, because
that requirement is, is part of
the definition of the least
drastic means principle.
Go ahead.
Chairman Senator, I, I think I'm
with you now. Thank you for that
clarification. Um, a couple of
things for point of
clarification.
First
In this bill.
We are not changing the way the
civil commitment process occurs.
All we are doing in this bill is
saying that when a competency
evaluation is conducted, it will
also include a civil commitment
and AOT evaluation.
To be used in a separate civil
proceeding.
The only other way that this
bill changes the civil
commitment process is that it
does provide in a later uh
provision of the bill that civil
commitment can happen in an
inpatient facility that is not
uh Vegas.
And that was at the request of
DOH. We met with them and they
said, look, there are other
facilities that can handle civil
commitment other than Vegas. We
want those to be available for
use. Um, so this definition, I,
I don't believe impacts the way
that this criminal competency
bill will handle.
Exactly what happens in a
criminal case, but it does allow
if someone is subject to a civil
commitment order in a separate
civil proceeding after the
criminal case is disposed of,
that those can, that can be held
in a place that is in the
defendant's community or in that
case, the respondents community.
Um, and DOH has let us know that
there are places other than
Vegas that are available for
that purpose. I could not tell
you today if there's one in
every single community, so I
understand the concern that if
there is not one of those
suitable facilities in a
respondents community that that
may pose a problem, but that
wouldn't be in the criminal
context, it would be in the
civil context. Yes, and, and Mr.
Chair, yes, Mr. uh, that I
understand. I, I, I'm worried
about in that, in that when
you're trying to get them into
the treatment.
Um,
That if this language is in
there, and then I like, I, I
really like that you can do it
in their community. I, I worry
that this language requires you.
To do it in their community if
that facility, if the facility
is there, suitable available
facility close to their place of
residence is there. I feel like
this definition would require
them to be placed there rather
than giving the flexibility to
be placed elsewhere if, if that
was the best choice.
Go ahead, you know, we, um, if I
may, Mr. Chair, and, um, I mean,
senator.
This provision.
Discusses what should be in the
evaluation.
It does not dictate any outcomes
either through the civil
commitment process itself or the
AOT process. This is just
reflecting what needs to be
considered by the evaluator and
put into a report. Remember we
talked about the expanded
evaluation.
So if these points are
addressed, Mr. Chair, and, um,
senator, that would give an
opportunity for the prosecutor
who under current law has
commitment. So
I'm a little confused about, um,
questions about where they're
going to be sent and, and that
kind of thing. That is through a
separate process that will be
utilized should the case be
dismissed against the individual
and civil commitment is sought.
Which Mr. Chair.
I get that, but by bringing in
this term of art.
I think we are, and, and maybe,
maybe I am missing something
here, um.
It seems like the, I'm, I'm just
looking at this definition and
trying to understand.
How it applies.
To the evaluation.
If it, if we, if it's not.
If the kind of the the standards
that are laid out in the
definition aren't something that
would necessarily need to be
followed as a result of the
evaluation?
Like, why, why are we using this
term?
I maybe it's my real question.
I'll take a stab and then I have
a brilliant expert sitting next
to me. We um wanted to create a
report that would be useful in
the civil commitment process or
the assisted out treatment
process. So we look to each of
those statutes and adopted the
criteria that they the relevant
criteria in this bill, so the
the reporter, the evaluator
would know what points they need
to address. That report could
then potentially
be used through the separate
civil commitment process in the
court there, the judge would
make whatever appropriate
decisions they deem based on the
information received. I, I think
I might be understanding, Mr.
Chair. So, so, so.
Whether there is a suitable
available facility close to
their residences would be, would
have to be addressed using the
standard, but it's not
necessarily making that a
requirement, uh, in, in that
setting.
Mr. Chair and Senator, correct.
So, and so I, I hope we haven't
lost anybody here yet, but
looking over you guys, yes, I
am. I'm just because you're new,
not because you're not lawyers,
but, but if I, if I can uh uh
for the, for those that are new
of the committee, really to
understand this, I think you
start back on page 4.
and if you look on page 4 line
17.
This describes what a qualified
professional's opinion should be
in their assessment.
And then it goes on to list the
subparagraphs that we're talking
about on the next page, so these
are the things there's that the
evaluators to consider, and
that's really the word that I'm
I'm gonna focus on because then
by you get to the language that
sort of doing rightfully uh been
concerned about is one of the
considerations of the evaluator
is that language on page 5 and
6, which is whether a proposed
commitment would be consistent
with, that's really the key
language there, whether it would
be consistent with the treatment
needs of the defendant, uh, with
the
least drastic means uh
principles involved, so it
doesn't require, you're right
center doing, it doesn't require
that there have to be uh
location Vegas or whatever, it's
close to the location of the of
the person who's been evaluated,
but it's a consideration, right?
And it's that language in there
that says consistent with is
pretty loose, right? Uh, and so
as consideration of also kind of
lose, so they're gonna think
about it, right, um, but they
don't have to have it really I
think a concern that you have
center doing, right? And
hopefully that helps.
With, with what we're having so
much fun over here with, so
Senator Duke, you still have the
floor.
Mr. Chair, I will move on from
that. That's everyone's relief,
um, right, so on page 6, line
14.
Um, and representative, I'm sure
as an attorney you run into this
frustration too, uh, a
reasonable time.
Reasonable time kills me.
Um, I think, I think clear
deadlines are, are, are best,
and so page 6, line 14, um, and
this is saying this is when, uh,
when evaluation reports need to
be submitted.
And it says with it, for someone
who is not incarcerated, it's
within a reasonable time.
Um, or no, no, no, when a
hearing has to be held. It's
within a reasonable time after
the evaluation has been
submitted.
I would propose, Mister Chair,
on page 6, line 14, to strike a
reasonable time and, and
certainly there are 90 days.
Sure.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, that is
a friendly.
Thank you very much. All right.
uh, just a second, sir. So
again, I, I, we're we're still
kind of new and green in this
session, so I want to make sure
that your members understand
some things that we take for
granted. A lot of times those of
us that have been doing this too
long, take a lot of things for
granted. So I want to make sure
you all always understand the
page we're on, the line we're
on, uh, that struck language
proposes to strike language
underlying language is proposed
to be added, and, and
understanding clearly what these
amendments are when they come
up, but again, I'm really
counting on those of you to to
stop me and stop the.
Maybe when things are not
abundantly clear, all right, so
Senator Doig is again looking at
that language online 14 and 15.
Senator Do again just uh one
more time, the reason for the
proposed amendment and the chair
has said is a sponsor that it's
an acceptable or favorable
amendment.
So when we uh when we are
dealing with timelines and and
legal cases, um,
We want to make, I, I think it
is best to have a very clear
timelines, uh, so that everyone
knows what needs to be done and
when. And so this would be
setting a, a, a clear deadline
to hold that hearing for someone
who wasn't incarcerated.
Um, rather than this kind of
nebulous reasonable time.
And to help the discussion a
little bit, if you look on that
same page, li 6, if you look at
line 2.
This is if you start the page
before it says the hearing has
to be held within and the line
two says in certain cases it has
to be done within 30 days,
right? This is for an individual
who's incarcerated on a
potential felony. It's very
specific 30 days.
If you look down online 8, it
says for an individual who's
incarcerated but not charged
with a felony, ah, the hearing
has to be within 10 days.
And the thinking behind that is
if you're not charged with a
felony, but you are in
incarcerated, it should be a
faster hearing, right, so minor
crime incarcerated, so it's a 10
day deadline. If you're a
felony, you can be held for 30
days before a hearing is
demanded of you.
Uh, and the, and the last
example that Senator Duke's
talking about is Brendan a
defendant who's not incarcerated
at all, and the statute as it
would be coming over to us would
say that hearing has to be
within a reasonable period of
time, and um I think Senator
Doig and the and the sponsor
recognize that we try not to
leave things that loose, right,
uh, to say that you're gonna
have a hearing within a
reasonable amount of time may
differ between lawyers and
judges, and so Senator Dukes
proposing a very fixed number of
days for that deadline to be 90
days and the sponsor.
and share so that's a favorable
change to the bill, so that's
what we're on, on that
amendment, Senator Master
suggest something on that
amendment? Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Senator, great catch,
great catch at it circled as
well. We just, let's just take a
minute, Mr. Deadlines.
If we say 90 days, 90% of these
hearings, 95% are gonna be
within day 80 and day 90.
So
If we didn't put in the 90 days,
would they be closer to 60, and
given the lack of.
You know, providers and
psychologists, in other words,
there's 90, a good number.
Would seeks to be a better
number.
I think 90 works, but I just
wanted us to take a moment to
think about it.
Thank you, the committee
questions,
thoughts?
We're on a proposed amendment.
Sarah Welling, no, I want you
in. Jump in.
There's one bill we're only
hearing one bill all night long,
you all take I look at look at
look at look at the
chair
grimace. I saw the grimace, but
uh we give you our whole day
traveling the whole day it's a
first,
never happened before.
So
thank you Mr. Chair.
OK, well, so this is the
question I have because I mean,
I'm clearly we accept this bill
as presented to us, and now
we're going line by line. My
question is,
This, there's a combination of
bills in this bill.
Um
Is there
I mean, I guess what I'm
thinking is,
Is there ever a question as to
why we got it in one bill? Why
aren't we looking at it in
different bills?
Why do we accept it as one bill?
I'm just asking.
Because that's, this is a lot,
and they're all, it's all
different stuff.
I don't want to say.
Frankenstein of a bill, but I
mean, there are a lot of
different things here, so I
guess I'm asking the question,
is that an appropriate question
to ask before we go line by
line.
That's the floor and you have a
question, and I guess we could
maybe talk a little bit about
that, I, I chuckled only because
if this is a Frankenstein to
you, we could talk to you about
some bills that uh have many,
many parts and many provisions
over many, many hours in our
past year, so it's not, it's not
an unreasonable question, uh,
senator, but you're right, we've
got a very specific amendment in
front of us. I hope you
understand what the amendment
is, and then your question is a
legitimate one, but let me, let
me take care of the amendment
first, um, and then
will at some point, I promise
you during the discussion we'll
ask why are we doing it this
way? And it's a very legitimate
good question, so on the
amendment though, um, is there
any further discussion on the
matter that's presently before
us, uh, Senator Paul, and then
Senator Thornton was that you
too?
Really, you guys, you guys tag
team over there, is that what it
is over there, it takes two of
us to strategize. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, yeah, I mean, coming
from the side of the the.
table over here that's not
attorneys. So when we're talking
90 days, to me, that seems like,
when I'm saying reasonable time,
that's a lengthy amount of
reasonable time. And I'm also
thinking from the perspective of
we're talking about somebody
who's not incarcerated. If I'm
not incarcerated, I'm waiting 90
up to 90 days to have a hearing
on this matter.
To me is, is a long time. So I
just, I don't know if there's um
Specific reasoning as to why 90
would be chosen and not 45 days.
But
Senator might be able to
senator,
um.
Because our courts are really
busy.
And I don't want to overburden
them, and I, and if someone is
not incarcerated, then, then
there is not as much I think of
a time pressure there. Um, if
you have your liberty and, and
then
And I, I don't, I don't have the
same concerns about making sure
it gets done real fast. Um, so
I'd want to build in enough.
Enough time to give the courts.
A little, uh,
Flexibility. That was my, my
goal with the 90.
Center you still the floor.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator,
Follow-up question on my end
would be, you know,
Residents that are in my
district, constituents in my
district.
are wanting to see action taking
place, and I understand that the
courts are backed up and maybe
that's a whole other other
problem that's got to be solved
of how do we address that so
that we can start seeing some
folks be held accountable at the
end of the day. I don't have any
other follow up questions or or
um things to your statement, but
that, you know, just tearing
what I hear from the folks that
that live in my district on a
consistent basis is they want to
see things and people be held
accountable in a timely manner
and for things not to drag out.
So thank you, Mr.
Cha, thank you, Senator. the
proposed amendments, uh, you
have something? Were you about
to say something? No.
Right, uh, we're on the proposed
amendment. Is there any other
discussion? Let me take care of
the amendment first. Is there
any objection to the adoption
amendment?
Senator Brantly objecting.
Others, yes, Senator Paul,
Senator Thornton as well too,
others in support that
amendments adopted. We just take
a moment because we're going to
spend some more time looking at
other amendments, so I wanna
address the O'Malley's question
and make sure that others had a
chance to weigh in, so, uh, the
house put a lot of work into
this, I know the chair worked on
this a lot during the interim
and uh along with Miss Dorsey,
and they involved me and Brandon
and others at times, and we
appreciate all that work. Um, I
appreciate the fact that
Charwoman's over here not trying
to suggest.
that it's perfect. Um, and that
they cannot be improved. She's
been accepting of some
amendments which I think are
good amendments so far, and our
goal is to put out the best
product we possibly can, working
across chambers and across
parties and and taking the time
that we need to do that. So,
that's the best way I can answer
your question, Senator, but you,
you better get used to it. We're
gonna, we, we see a lot of bills
where we're doing page by page,
line by line, and um the trust
me they'll do the same thing to
yours when you go over to see
them, uh,
And, and that's the way I think
the system works, and that's the
best answer I can give you, but
we're, we're gonna be doing that
in this committee a lot, and
we've got a few more here, and
I'm, I'm hopeful that the
amendments give us a better
piece of legislation and
Hope the chairwoman and her
expert Miss Dorsey agree.
Ultimately, the Senate does as
well. They're, they're
interesting this to us, and um
hopefully, that's what we're
doing here and ultimately,
hopefully the governor feels the
same way about it.
That's the best way I can give
you an answer.
All right. Don't ever be bashful
about asking like I always like
telling folks when you're when
you're new here in the freshman,
that's the best time to ask all
the questions I've told my
colleagues over here because
nobody will ever think it's a
foolish question or or ill
advised because you're new and
we expect you to have all those
questions. When, when I see
myself or my colleagues have
been here for 20 plus years and
they're asking, what is this in
the budget's like, boy, God, how
did you get to this point in
time, 20 years later, it's still
not understanding how this
works. That happens a lot too as
well. It's it's a.
complicated job. So hopefully
that helps, said O'Malley.
Um, others, so, OK, Senator Doo
back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So turning
to page 12.
And this is actually, this is a
concern I've had for a long time
and this is gonna, this is
actually existing language I'm
gonna talk about, but since the
goal here is to improve our
competency restoration process.
Right now
If someone gets committed, um,
let's say they get committed to
BHI, behavioral Health Institute
in Las Vegas. Uh, they have 30
days to pick that person up.
I have heard over and over and
over again about people getting
like a 30 day commitment, and
they wait until day 28.
To pick them up.
And they had a ride to Las
Vegas, and they are, they are
there for a day or two and then
they are discharged and they
have gotten no act because then
their term of commitment is up.
Uh, and they've got no actual
treatment. Um, this drives me
crazy. Um, I have.
Brought this up with the
director of BHI, uh, just this
last interim, he said, oh,
that's not true. I'm, I'll send
you all the, all the proof and
got never got sent a thing, and
I know from practitioners in the
community who see this with
their patients and with their
clients. Uh, this is definitely
happening. So on page 12, line
16.
Where it says that the
Department of Health shall admit
a defendant for comp
competency restoration within 30
days?
I would like to strike 30 and
change that to 7.
There's gonna be another
amendment that goes along with
that then on the next page
because right now, they also
have 14 days to give a
certification of why they can't
do it.
Um, I'd like, and that's on line
8, page 13, line 8, that 14
days, I'd like to strike that 14
and change that to 7 as well.
Basically, they would have a
week, they would have a week to
pick them up or say why they
can't.
And so people would get the
treatment that they're actually
being committed for.
So it, yeah, 7 and 7, so on page
12 line 16, changing 30 to 7.
Page 13, line 8, Changing 14 to
7.
And um I no, I don't know if she
intends it not, but I I see our
doctor out there nodding her
head very strongly affirmatively
and that we we don't go back to
you for a second opinions and
and a debate with the audience,
but I do appreciate an
affirmative nod, and I, I'm
making note of it. I think
there's also something to note
for the new members committee,
but Senator Duke's proposing in
these two amendments is changing
language I proposed to be
changed by the sponsor, if you
notice that, so it's not struck
out language that she's
proposing to restore, and it's
not underlying language.
It's existing statue, right? So
she's she's proposing to change
existing statutory language and
for Senator O'Malley's point,
that's perfectly within the
rules here too, right? So it's
sometimes a little tricky when
we start changing existing
statutes that are really not
really within the intent of the
bill, but it's fair game, uh, if
that makes some sense too. So
back to you, chair.
I Miss Dorsey would like to
comment if that's all right.
Sure.
Chairman Senator, thank you for
the proposed amendment. Um, I
just want to make one point of
clarification about where we are
in the statute here.
Um, the
Mhm
suggested that the committee is
understands this complicated
process.
The
A person who is found not
competent and who's sent to
Vegas for restoration
programming, which we're not
calling treatment anymore, we're
calling it programming, um, can
be there if they are dangerous
for up to 9 months. When they
come back at 30 days, it's for a
review hearing to check in about
the progress of restoration. Is
it likely to be successful? Are
we getting there or not? Is it
not possible to restore this
particular defendant.
Um, so,
Somebody being sent back to the
review hearing wouldn't
necessarily mean that
restoration programming is
terminated at that point in time
unless at that stage the
evaluator were to say, we can't
make progress, this person
cannot be restored.
That being said, uh, of course I
defer to the representative, but
we are always in favor of
expediting processes and making
sure that people are having full
access to treatment. Um, so I
think reducing 30 days to 7 days
and 14 days to 7 days absolutely
makes sense to make sure that
we're getting at the point of
what the competency proceeding
is.
And Mr. Chair, Mr. Ty, as you
were saying that, I was
thinking, you know, this chain
in order to, I think, affect the
change that I would want to
effect, which is to
Reduce this timeline for
everyone who gets committed, not
just in a restoration of
competency, uh,
Situation, we, we would need to
change some other statutes as
well. Um,
So what, uh, which maybe I will
bring to the floor.
as an amendment. Um,
Uh, because the goal here is to
make sure that people who need
treatment get treatment, right,
Mr. Chair?
Representative, we want people,
the people who we in any context
are being committed for
treatment and aren't getting it
now. I think that is just such
an unfair uh process that we are
saying we are simply committing
you, but you're not actually
going to get any help. You're
gonna sit in UNMy.
For 28 days.
And then you're gonna get a ride
away from your community and be
stuck there after getting no,
no, none, none of the treatment
that you've been committed to
get. Um,
Um, Mr. Chair, I appreciate your
point, Senator, but that's not
the point of this competency
bill, and I believe tomorrow is
the deadline for filing bills.
No, and, and Mr. Chair,
representative, I, I, I hear
what you're saying, um.
And so I.
Emergency. Right.
Sounds like a good, good, good
emergency bill, yes, in, in
which case I think I will
probably do that. Um, but I
would like to still move this
amendment so that this will be
consistent with
The emergency bell, but
apparently I'm going to
introduce it's a friendly.
We'll call it a constructive
proposal amendment, any
discussion more on those two
changes.
Consistent with Senator Paul,
your comments earlier too,
right, making sure constituents
have responsiveness. Senator, is
that a hand up? OK.
Thank you,
Mr. Cameron Representative, I'm
just reading.
Reading, trying to read existing
law through the lines and stuff.
Um
And notice the bill after kind
of cuts.
Cuts off the
The wording of
Subprograph 2 on line 11.
It was attached. Currently it's
attached to.
Line 16, but I think it works.
The bill is basically saying.
You shall not be released from
that facility except pursuant to
an order of the court that
committed the defendant boom,
and then we just start like a
new idea, the Department of
Health shall admit a defendant
for within 30 days.
Of the court's order, and then
you jump to page 13, line 8, and
it says within 14 days of the
court's order.
Is that the same order or is it
two different orders?
Mr. Chair, Senator, it is the
same order because that 14 days
is, is referring to a
certification that like BHI
would give in response to that
court's order saying we can't do
it.
Thank you, um, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Doig, so it says the
certification shall be made
within 7 days.
Of the court's order of
commitment.
In other words, is, is it the
same 7 days, 7 days plus 7 days
or it's the same 7 days, they
both have to be done within 7
days. Exactly, Mr. Chair, uh,
they both have to be done with
it either take them or say why
you can't within 7 days you
proposed amendment. Is there any
objection to adopting that
amendment 2 places, 7 days.
See no objection, all in favor
of that amendments adopted, so
are doing, you're next.
Thank you. Now, Mr. Chair.
But this next one is dealing
with, starting at page 33.
in the section page by page
10 pages where we at jumping
right through
you. And I only have one more
after this,
um,
so page 33.
So starting with section 11. If
members look, Section 11,
Section 12, Section 13, Section
14.
are all doing the same thing.
They're taking out the
The the language about it being
uh, you know, a 4th degree
felony for 1st offense, 3rd
degree for 2nd offense, 2nd
degree felony for 3 or or
subsequent.
And then in section 15.
We have this, uh, this language
that would apply to all of them.
So, and it's uh like on page 37.
It is, is the
The bulk of the language of 15.
And so looking at that and every
time I see us doing the same
thing over and over again. I
wonder why.
Can, can we just
Combine them.
So
But I'd like to propose, and I,
and this is typed out, uh,
unfortunately, not by LCS. I
apologize. Um, but, uh, so.
Looking on on page 33, that
first section 11, that first
statutory section is, uh,
30-16D1.
I think it's gonna be useful.
We've taken the time to write
this up, uh, representative,
just give us a minute. Let's get
a copy for you. I think it'll be
much easier for everyone to
follow along. So we'll get some
copies take a
take a stretch.
Well, that's happening, I can
jump to my next amendment.
That, you know maybe you
relinquish the floor to me for a
second. We could do the part you
skipped over on page 32 and 33,
or maybe handling things
sequentially each wise.
Just the Glock switch section.
You told me you wanted me to do
this amendment, right? Yes.
Yeah, and then we'll come back
to you from that point. So, um,
so Ms. Dorsey, representative,
if you look on page 32, 33, your
bill incorporates, among other
things, uh, what's called here a
weapon conversion device, that's
the glock switch section of your
bill.
If you look at um the two
definitions you've got in
subsection D, so for members,
this is on page 32.
Beginning on line 15, you've got
a definition of a fully
automatic weapon, and then a
definition of a semi-automatic
weapon.
Want to spend a little bit of
time with you on those two
definitions because I think that
the the.
The distinctions and the
definitions of those two,
Uh, terms become pretty
important, particularly when we
see what we're going to see
coming up ahead of us, which are
things like Senator O'Malley's,
um, uh, salt, so-called assault
weapon uh legislation and so
forth, and, and we spent a lot
of time with these kind of
definitions of what it, what,
what does it mean to have a
fully automatic weapon versus a
semi-automatic weapon. My, my
proposed uh uh for you to
consider is
Not too significant except to
try and be consistent, so if you
look at the definition of a
fully automatic weapon, you'll
see language on line 18 that
says, uh, a gun that can be
readily restored is just to
shoot more than one shot.
You'll see that by a single
function of the trigger, I'm
paraphrasing there a little bit.
And then if you look at the
definition of a semi-automatic
weapon, if you look down to
lines 24 and 25, you'll see a
reference there and describes it
as a separate function of the
trigger to fire each cartridge
or shell. Those are the same
ideas said two different ways,
right, but it's the same idea.
And so we'd like to reconcile
one or the other and probably we
think more elegantly to uh.
I'm told,
uh, this is where I usually make
a joke about federal government,
but I'll use this, um, the, the
federal language it uses the an
automatic weapon to be something
that is restored to shoot more
than one shot. That seems so
colloquial, uh, language, it
doesn't seem very, very, it's
not nearly fancy enough a gun
that shoots more than one shot,
uh, shoot more than one shot, it
seems, uh, yeah, again, to, to
um casual. So our suggestion is.
that we would take that fire,
uh, a separate function of the
trigger to fire each cartridge
or shell up into that other
section of the bill and and take
care of it that way. So, so when
I said readily restore your sho.
Um, uh.
to fire each cartridge or shell
by a single function of the
trigger and, and replace that
language that's in there now for
that, for that shoot more than
one shot, that makes sense what
we're trying to do there. Um,
Mr. Chair, yes, and that would
be a friendly.
OK. Thank you very much. So
I'll, I'll give you the
specifics here in just a second,
Emma, let's make sure that
everybody in the committee gets
what we're doing. This is one of
those uh circumstances I'll,
I'll put it this way, where
we're not really changing the
substance of your block switch,
uh, at all. We're trying to take
two definitions and make them
very consistent and in uniform,
um, by using the same language
that right now, the way the bill
is worded uses different
language to describe the same
thing, right? This is, this is
what um
Back in my house days, we used
to call an elegant solution, so.
Um, that's the proposed
amendment and we'll give you the
specifics here in just a minute,
so.
Yeah.
Chair, are you, are you changing
the definition of one or are you
changing the definition of 2.
The proposal would be to change
the definition in subsection
one, and instead of saying to
shoot more than one shot, it
would be to uh fire or see.
Let me make sure I'm gonna do
this right.
Uh, so we, we're keeping the
same language for a single
function of the trigger.
Uh, so it'd be restored to buy.
Each cartridge or shell.
And that, that would be
replacing the language there,
so, so where each cartridge show
would replace the shoot more
than one shot.
restored to fire each cartridge
or shell without manual
reloading a single function
trigger. I think that's what
we're trying to do that work?
Yeah, I got it.
So Bren's making the point we're
we're actually proposing to
amend the federal language, uh.
To, well, but we also have this
other section that has, and, and
frankly the other secondary
language, the 22nd paragraph is
much better worded, right, than
the, the language. So, uh, this
is just where we kind of show
our backbone once in a while and
tell the feds sometimes we're
smarter than they are, uh, and I
have no trouble doing that from
time to time, so that's the
proposed amendment of committee
members. Questions on the
amendment, anyone?
We're really not changing
anything substantively, right,
we're just doing a more elegant
job of build drafting. So is
there any objection to the
adoption of the amendment?
All right, sing them, thank you.
Back to you, Senator Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, do we have
those poppies.
Uh, we need to get one to.
Would you get 12, ribs and char.
Do you have a copy?
OK.
So Mr. Chair,
So we're on page 33.
And we have these.
3 sections 11 through 14, which
go from page 33 through page 36,
and they're all making the same
change. Um, and looking at what
that statue is.
It is, uh,
Unlawful taking of a motor
Article 16D that these are under
is unlawful taking of a of a
vehicle or a motor vehicle, and
it's, it's breaking out these
different ways of doing that.
Given that we are applying
essentially the same penalty
scheme.
to these 4 sections.
I was thinking it might, it
would be um
It'd be more efficient to just
collapse those 4 session
sections into one. And so,
This
amendment that we have in front
of us would essentially.
But each of those 4 separate
sections into one section.
And then have that same section
15, that same sentencing scheme.
Um
Actually built into it.
So we wouldn't need to have that
in a separate statute either.
And then there's still some
other other sections under
Article 16D that, but those
would have those ones would not
be included in this sentencing
scheme. So they would still stay
as their own standalones.
But basically, it isn't really
changing the content of any of
these. It's just, just
consolidating.
uh Miss Dorsey has a few
questions. Chairman Senator.
Always in favor of simplifying
and reducing language where we
can, so I appreciate that, uh,
step, potential step towards
efficiency. I am just curious
though, since I'm just seeing
this in the bill.
Um, in House Bill 8 on page 37.
Lines 8 through 11.
There is a subsection speaking
about what a single offense is.
Is, does your amendment strike
that provision or is it included
in your
He now
Mr. Chair, I am, I am looking at
this, and I actually think
I think I misspoke when I said
we would take that section 15
out, uh.
I think we would leave that in
and just consolidate the others,
so we would leave that language
that you have in, in 15.
Mr.
Chairman Senator B would. So B
would remain section 15
altogether would remain. Yeah.
And, and the other 4 would be
consolidated and all of them
would say.
Look at section 15.
The only other comment I would
make, it's not necessarily a
question but something for the
committee to consider, Chairman
Senator and in reviewing this.
I after it came to the judiciary
in the house and the drafter
from council service that we
were working with was concerned
because initially House Bill 50
in its original iteration, um,
simply struck in each
substantive portion, the penalty
provision and then added
penalties at the end, and the
drafter said that that was
problematic in terms of
statutory construction, Chairman
Senator, and that when we are
writing this section, it needs
to be clear that each of these
things are a crime and
So, um, that is why the drafter
in their infinite wisdom went
back in and added um in each
subsection, for example, on page
36 at line 20, uh, clarifying
that each of these things are a
crime, they are a felony as
provided for later.
Um, and that was to as the
chairman referenced at the
beginning of this committee
hearing to avoid collateral
attack down the line, um, so
that's the only thing I want to
make sure that we're complying
with in your new version, and it
may do so, but I just wanted to
raise that issue.
Mr. Chair representative Ms
Dorsey, I mean, that makes sense
to me, um, I would, I would not
want to, uh, risk invalidating
something for the sake of
efficiency. Uh,
So I will, I will withdraw that
cause
OK, let's, let's maybe not
take action I think we should
look at, we should probably talk
to counsel service about trying
to do this, right? Senators said
you looked a little,
uh, perplexed.
I'm not perplexed, but
Um
I think it stands fine as is.
Um, you know, I appreciate you
all wanting to consolidate, but.
Um
I heard the senator say she's
she understands why we're doing
it the way we are.
Um
Yeah, I, I, I understand, I
think, I think uh.
Well, Senator Duke and I had
talked about consolidating those
sections, I think it makes sense
to consolidate those sections,
but it's gonna take some work,
you'd have to change the title
of that section number one,
you'd have to also on page um.
37. There's a reference there at
the very first line to sections
30-16D1 through D4, you'd have
to change that because there
wouldn't be D1 through D4, they
would all be consolidated, so
that there would take probably
some more work than what's in
here. I still think it's a good
idea. And, um, and so I hope
you'll remain open to that,
maybe uh with the floor
amendment or in the next
committee process. I think this
goes to finance, right? No, it
does not, right? So.
Yeah, I, I think I, I hear
Senator doing what I hear her
saying is maybe receding from
the proposal because you've been
advised Ms. Dorsey from council
service, there's a reason to
have separated these, but I also
appreciate Senator Doig's, and
it sounds like you do too, the
the effort here is to eliminate
ages from the bill and
redundancy in the statutes,
which really is kind of a lot of
redundancy, it seems like, same
penalties for each of these
various crimes which are all
similar, similar, so of course
section 11 is unlawful taking
of.
a vehicle.
Uh, section 12 is embezzlement
of a motor vehicle.
It's section 13 is fraudulently
obtaining a motor vehicle, all
kind of the same thing, really,
um, and there're, they're
separated in existing law
because there were different
penalties for each of those
different crimes, but in your
bill, you're putting all the
penalties the same for all of
those same crimes. So it, it,
again, it seems like something
that could and should be
consolidated, so I hope you'll
remain open to doing that even,
it may, may not be tidy to do
things on the floor, but I think
it'd be a good idea in the.
They're doing.
All right. Well, I will.
I, I will move on from.
From this topic.
Um
Or
Or not, or you still want me to?
Yeah, yeah, no, keep going.
OK. I thought we were moving the
fentanyl.
I, I am gonna, I understand.
Uh, Senator Brantly has a
fentanyl one, but that is before
what I was gonna get to in this
bill, so if you want to go to
Senator Brantley,
I do not. I, I have something
after the final section.
39.
You do? All right.
Please, yes we can go back, Mr.
Chairman, to page 32, right
where you.
We 32 line 11.
And sponsors, I'm gonna, I'm
gonna rely on you and your
expert witness.
How are we defining weapon, and
I say that because when I pulled
up the definition in New Mexico
of weapon, it's legally defined
as any instrument that can cause
death or great bodily harm, so
that would include not just
firearms, but knives, archery,
equipment, and other sharp
objects. So without trying to
change the integrity of this
bill.
I guess my question would you
would be why we were referring.
To you defining weapon
conversion devices, which in
this context is focused
exclusively on devices that
change semi-automatic weapons
into fully automatic weapons and
not staying with the more
common.
Uh, definition which is referred
to in federal law as um machine
gun conversion devices. Why, why
are we not staying with the
same?
Continuity is federal.
Well
So, so if I can just a little
bit to your question too, is if
you look at page 33, line one,
there is a definition, right, of
a weapon conversion device.
Uh, so I wanna make sure we're
oriented to that definition. And
then Senator, your question was
with regard to page 32, line 11,
you said each weapon conversion
device. So you started your
discussion referencing there,
but I want to make sure that,
and your, your question was.
The breadth of the word weapon,
which may exist in our law, and
I agree with you the weapon
could be a lot of things, but,
but when you referred us, uh,
you pointed us to line 11 on
that page, 32, which doesn't
refer to a weapon but refers to
a weapon conversion and device,
which is defined.
By, by the proposed statute. So
I hope that gives us a little
orientation to where we're at,
but, but you have the floor,
Senator,
and actually to correct myself,
we would begin on line 4 where
it first starts referencing
weapon conversion devices. I
guess I just have a a general
question as to because weapon
can be defined as so many
things, and I recognize that
we're defining what a weapon
conversion devices on the top of
33 is why we wouldn't have just
stuck with what federal law has.
In referring to that as just a
machine gun conversion device
and completely leaving weapon,
which it does have a broad
definition out of this.
Mr. Cher could I um
Mr.
Public safety, advisor to the
governor.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Brantley,
members of the committee, um,
thank you for the question. I
think one of the goals here.
Watching this through the
community process, responding to
the law enforcement requests,
seeing what the men and women in
our communities are finding on
the streets. The National
Firearms Registry, which is what
regulates federal law and re
regulates machine guns is has a
much broader breadth of items
that can be regulated and a
registry that is attached to it.
Our goal with this bill.
Simply to regulate the device
that converts a semi-automatic.
Weapon and we're gonna talk a
little bit about that
definitional piece to an
automatic weapon, not to bring
in the substance of any of the
other national firearms
registry, uh, issued items or
regulated items is simply to
confine it to as narrow a scope
to what the problem we're
experiencing here in New Mexico.
Thank you, thank you for that
clarification, Mr. Chair. I'm
not going to propose an
amendment, but it seems like if
we wanted to clarify it, even
narrow that down, we would also
clarify the of a weapon,
understand the intent, but, but
if, if the chair if the uh
sponsors happy with that. It's
just a basic question of why we
wouldn't, we talk about how we
wanted this to parallel federal
law in many cases, including
what we're going to talk about
in fentanyl, but this does not
parallel the definitions used in
federal law and
That's just my point.
Thank you. and if I may just,
Senator, again, a moment ago we
changed something away from
federal law because we thought
we could do it better and so I,
I'll just tell you when I
approach these issues, I look at
everybody whose ideas are out
there. I try and pick the best
idea or best definition, and
then I claim credit for it, so
uh in in this particular case,
uh, weapon conversion devices
what the sponsors used as
opposed to a machine gun, but
the feds have a different
definition. I think this is
actually a better definition, to
be honest with you. That's.
One person's opinion, so Senator
Dewey.
Mr. Chair, before we move on
from this section, um, I have a
question.
So this is dealing with
unlawfully obtained weapon
conversion device.
Um, like, if you are 3D
printing.
is that unlawfully obtained?
Yes.
And how
I, I how, how do we know, Mr.
Baker.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Doig, the uh
reference earlier to the federal
regulation related to the
National Firearms Registry, a, a
person can lawfully obtain a
machine gun to Senator Brantly's
point earlier, and so we want
there to be no conflation about
the notion of this. If somebody
has pre 1986 registered weapon,
filed all the applications,
passed all the backgrounds, and
been afforded the opportunity to
to possess one,
a machine gun conversion.
can be legally obtained within
the United States. And so this
we worked with the industry
folks during the committee
process to ensure that there
would be no.
Unintended consequence of a
other otherwise lawfully
obtained machine gun conversion
device under federal law would
turn into a felony in the state
of New Mexico.
OK, sure, so, so there's a
process you have to follow to
lawfully obtain one of these if
you don't follow that process,
it is per se unlawfully
obtained.
So Mr. Chair, then that makes me
wonder because we have, I was.
That's the problem of looking at
stuff for too long when we're
talking, um.
Cause then it says in in B on
page 32 lines 11 and 12, each
weapon conversion device found
in violation of this section
constitute constitutes a
separate offense. And every time
we have that, we have, it raises
the specter of proportionality.
Um
So we don't have language in
here that says.
All those would something that
would have to run consecutively,
and it could potentially run
concurrently, but
If I.
I am 20 years old and I 3D print
100.
Of these conversion devices.
And it's uh it's a 3rd degree.
3rd degree felony, that's 3
years.
And there's 300 years.
So bye-bye. Right, 300 years you
could be facing in prison.
For 3D printing, these devices.
Which that to me raises a a
proportionality issue.
Um, and concern.
And so
Yes, I don't know if you, you
want to respond to that
representative.
Just don't do it right, Senator
Brown.
I.
And to too pretty, pretty, yeah.
No, I, I hear you. If you're
talking about trying to find a
way so that outcome doesn't
happen, I'm happy to discuss
that with you, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
Well, Mr. Chair, I, I think it
would be striking that sub B,
those that on page 32, the lines
11 and 12.
Um, because then each, each
device would not constitute a
separate offense.
So I'll propose that motion, Mr.
Chair, on page 32 striking lines
11 and 12, and then renumbering
the subsequent.
Uh, sections accordingly.
Constructive or
unconstructively.
Constructive or unconstructive
I guess I shouldn't keep saying
friendly really friendly, but
they're OK
Mr. Chair, as long as I've been
here it's friendly and I'm
trying to use constructive or
unconstructive. So I um
constructive accept it,
Mr. Chair and Senator.
All right, the motion before us
is to strike that subsection
being laid letter as Senator
Maestus on that amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman Representative
Chandler, Senator, no, great,
great catch. I see the point,
and I agree with you, but now I
believe as written now, it would
allow different jurisdictions to
interpret it differently.
One prosecutor can
Hit somebody with multiple.
Devices, another one would
choose to consolidate them and
then the, the courts would say
what, what were they doing that
night in judiciary Committee,
that happens. So we may want to
say, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Page 32, line 13. I don't know,
I don't know how to word it,
but.
A person who commits unlawful
possession of any weapon
conversion device or or any
number of weapon conversion
devices guilty of a 3rd degree
felony. I think we need to.
I think we need to write it
affirmatively.
And Mr. Chair, my concern with
that is, so if I do it,
In February, I print out 10 of
them, and then, uh, in May, I do
it again. I mean, those should
be separate charges. It
shouldn't be just one charge for
all of those.
So do we generally in our
criminal statutes specify, I
know sometimes we say something
will, will be a separate
offense, but is that stand like,
do we always address that?
Chairman Senator, that's a
fabulous question. uh, as I'm
sure you're familiar in criminal
law, there's never and always
for anything, um, but there is a
very well developed body of case
law that, uh, courts are well
versed in applying to facts to
determine whether something
constitutes a separate
transaction or occurrence, um,
and
It's a it's discussion and
debate. I think I, I do kind of
favor the idea of leaving it to
the courts for the law
enforcement folks that are
listening, you pull somebody
over, they've got 3 blocks, each
with a conversion device, is
that 3 felonies or is that
person a one time felon, and
Senator's point is that, yeah,
in that case, that could be a
long, that could be a 9-year
stint for those 3 Glocks, right?
Um, as opposed to one in I think
what the suggestion from Ms.
Dorsey is is that we leave that
to the courts to decide whether
this is a.
3 time or 1 time felony, and
yeah, you could see a situation
where somebody's got 20 blocks
with switches on them, is that
20 felonies. Um, it's unresolved
question in my mind, so.
That's one thought on that.
Other members on the proposed
amendment.
The amendment is to strike
subparagraph B and read letter
on um.
Page 32, line 11. Is there any
objection to adoption of a
constructive amendment show uh
senators Paul Thornton and
Brantley, others in support of
the amendment, that amendments
adopted. Yes, right. Senator
Doo, you still have the floor.
I, I think Senator Brantley was
But she's gonna address us as
next in the bill.
But the,
the fentanyl.
All right.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, Senator
Duhe.
My.
Let's see, so
Page 39.
I
16.
Oh
Yeah, thank you.
OK, uh, Senator Duke, you have
the floor, you're relinquishing
to Bradley,
and Brantley, you have the floor
then page 39. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. The purpose of this
event you have before you on the
dressing, um, some striking
lines on 39.
is to allow the measurement of
fentanyl to be determined by
weight and not by number of
pills. If I quickly walk you
through the amendment on page
39, you'd be striking line 16
and 17.
Hold on just one moment if I can
interrupt you, senator. So we've
been handed a proposed amendment
and we passed it out. This is
gonna be 30.1 footer number, OK,
so you're working through that
proposed amendment, is that
right?
Yes, sir. OK, thank you. Go
ahead, sir.
So if we took on page 39
striking lines 16 and 17.
Striking line 18.
Through the word or.
Also on 39.
Line 19, we're striking.
Which comma, whichever is less.
Striking lines 21 and 22.
We'd strike
Line 23 striking the word or.
And then on line 23 strike,
comma, whichever is less. And so
if you read that, the point of
that then would just be that we
would be measuring fentanyl,
still keeping the integrity of
the bill.
By weight that was included and
not by number of pills in the
event that someone had a
You know,
10 really large pills to
determine the quantity that
they're getting by weight only
and not number of pills, and
without changing really the
integrity of, of exactly what
you have in here is just, just
the determination by weight
only.
Mr. Sheriff, um, Mr. Baker may
address this.
Mark Baker.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, the
reason that the pill count was
included is that one of the
problems with fentanyl is having
it not manufactured by an actual
pharmaceutical company, having
it used to cut other drugs.
People are being exposed to it
when they think they're getting
something completely different,
and so the idea here was to use
two different metrics that law
enforcement could turn to to
deal with that problem, and if
the drug contains fentanyl
because we know that even a
single pill containing fentanyl
can be lethal. Um, you allow law
enforcement to deal with those
pills. Seriously, if they're
being mass produced at a level
that's consistent with serious
drug trafficking. And so that's
the, the purpose of having the
pill count, the elimination
would
leave it just at weight, which I
know some other states have
done, but that, that would be
the, uh, substantive impact of
the change.
OK. I, I guess I know that other
states have also just measured
it by weight and it was
expressed by law enforcement,
they would prefer it by weight,
but I understand that if it's
not constructive.
Um, and it is that I think it
was just to clarify exactly how
the measurements would be
determined, so there wasn't
confusion, and I say that in
case there were 3 or, you know,
4 large, depending on the size
of pills and what that looks
like over time once this law is.
Is it the way we're still able
to prosecute.
And determine, you know,
Um
Cheers Cervantes, um, Senator
Brantley, my read on that would
be the whichever is less would
then kick in and be operative
and so you would catch.
If you had like
Particularly potent fentanyl
pills, and there were only 3 of
them, and they had a certain
weight of grams, then you would
have a catch all, whichever was
less, and that's what the the
work that that language was
doing. OK, I'll, I'll, I'll pull
back that amendment if we're
gonna go ahead and leave it at
least by still wait so that
we're still an option by weight
and not only them.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman
Senator.
The, uh, we're still in section
17 really generally, right?
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
So I, I have real heartburn
about the, uh, the pill
approach, uh, for a couple of
reasons. Um, one of my brothers
is, uh, an addiction
psychiatrist who works with
fentanyl addicts. And he tells
me, they give out 100 pills for
free. That is your intro dose.
Um,
And 100 pills in the context of
a, of a fentanyl addict. It, it
sounds like a ton to me.
Uh
To a fentanyl addict, it could
be a couple days.
Worth of, of your, of your
supply. Um, people use a lot of
fentanyl.
Uh, so I think this is what we
would end up doing is we would
make a lot of users traffickers
by taking this approach.
I also think that if you have a
pill approach and if now the
goal is to stay below a certain
number of pills. I, it
encourages the producers to make
those pills stronger and, and,
and as a result we'll have more
ODs and more people dying.
Um, because the pills that
they're getting are stronger
because they don't want to have
as many on them at a time
because that's gonna expose them
to a trafficking charge.
Um
So I, I like taking, I, I, I
like Senator Brantley's
approach, uh, but what I would
suggest.
would be that we just make it a
flat.
3-year enhancement.
For, for 40 g of fentanyl.
Or more.
40 g having some reference
points. I my understanding, Mr.
Chair, is that there that the
the fences use 40 g.
And so again, we don't always
parallel the feds, uh, but
But I assume
I think I feel like they
probably know a lot more about
fentanyl than I do, and that
that number was chosen for a
reason.
Mr. Baker.
Cheer Cervantes, Senator Duheg.
So what I can tell you about the
way we came up, let me talk
about both pieces on the
Increasing the strength of the
pills, I think the market, the
drug dealers generally and are
trying to cut it as much as
possible, rather than make more
potent pills to avoid count, and
that whichever is less threshold
for the concentration would
still kick in on that piece.
regarding the um, the secondary
question. Federal court is a
mandatory 55 year sentence at 40
g. Colorado has a 4 to 16 year
sentence at 4 g.
And that is close to mandatory,
and so when I looked at this, we
talked to law enforcement to
find out what ranges they're
seeing is true trafficking with
the specific instruction, I
don't want to capture people who
are mere addicts who are
carrying around a lot. I
understand that some of these
carry around a lot, but
50 pills, 2 mg is enough to be a
fatal dose according to the um
to both health care providers
and the DEA. So you're talking
about 50 potentially lethal
doses in a, in a 100 pills. Um,
and that to me seemed
substantial. This again remains
a 023-year enhancement, and so
my thought is that this, and the
goal of that was to leave in
judges' hands, are we dealing
with somebody whose addiction is
so severe that they're carrying
50 pills, law enforcement still
would have to introduce an
expert on law enforcement to
prove that it's trafficking and
not mere possession in state
court that requires certifying
the law enforcement expert and
showing things like baggies,
scales, other indicia of true
trafficking, not just a number
alone, but to me it seemed like
this would bring this within the
realm for a judge to say, OK,
this is serious. We're at an
amount, um, you know, um, if
Colorado's 4 g.
And we're at um 100 pills,
you're talking still 2.5 times
higher than Colorado's threshold
before this would even kick in,
and then the judge would still
have the ability at sentencing
to reduce down to.
to as low as probation if, um,
if the judge, even in a
trafficking case, the defendant
was convicted of trafficking or
pled to trafficking, and the
judge saw reasons to believe
that it was an addict caught up
in the system. Our judges would
have the flexibility to still go
to 0.
So that's the theory. I, I
realized reasonable minds can
disagree on these things.
There's no magic.
Yeah, no, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Baker, I, I appreciate that, um.
I'm still very uncomfortable
with this approach. Um,
I, I, I think we're, we're gonna
catch.
People up and with trafficking.
That that our users, um, and
yes, fentanyl is crazy dangerous
and it scares the heck out of
me, and I am.
Uh
Wanna keep my kid inside
forever, so he never comes in
contact with it, um, but I know
that, but there's a big
difference between fentanyl
addicts and fentanyl
traffickers. Uh, and in general
we don't want to.
We don't
We don't want to criminalize
addiction. I mean, addiction is.
Is is a medical issue, uh, that
we should try to avoid
criminalizing. We should treat,
um, but we should avoid
criminalizing because that
doesn't help anyone, um,
traffickers.
Should absolutely go after, uh,
but I feel like the way that
this is.
Is written
poses as much threat to users as
traffickers. Uh, Mr. Chair.
It's not one or the other. Often
an addict is a trafficker, and I
do think we need to treat
someone who is preying on other
addicts differently than a
simple addict, and this, that is
what this bill is intended to
address, and as Mr. Baker
pointed out,
It's, it's not.
Mandatory sentencing in the
classic sense, it's an option
that the court can adopt to
enhance a a sentence if certain
criteria are met, and so I, I
think this is a very fair
approach to addressing what we
all recognize as, um, an
epidemic in this, um, state and
country and I appreciate where
you're coming from cause I
believe in treating addicts too,
but when an addicts also a.
Trafficker preying on other
addicts, I think we need to be
addressing it, so.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, this would not be uh
I guess friendly
And Mr. Chair Representative, I
agree with you, I just, uh, just
being an addict alone should not
accept you from
From consequences for your
actions if you're also a
trafficker. I, I did not mean
to, to suggest that in any way.
I do think that.
That the the federal approach
makes sense. So what all, I
don't know if there will be an
update on the committee for it,
but, but I'll propose, Mr.
Chair.
I
On page 39.
Striking.
Striking the colon at the end of
line 14.
Striking lines.
15 through 19.
Online 20 striking that
subsection B, so it just goes up
to
Continue the sentence from
above.
Um
Sorry, I'm doing this a bit on
the fly.
Uh, after 5 years.
Striking everything.
Through
5 years, which is on online 20.
Striking everything at starting
with the comma, striking
everything through.
The word van.
On line 23.
Inserting
And thereof.
Or
And I, I'll read this all when
we're done. Uh, then after the
word powder still on line 23,
inserting a period.
And striking everything that
comes after that.
that line.
Well, and then the next part.
The next part is isn't about
the, the pill numbers, so I
would, I would keep that
subsection C, it would be
reading that, um.
number to be, so I should, OK.
Sorry, this is a little messy.
Um, I just want to clarify that
strike and everything after that
and I wanted to make sure you're
talking really only about lines,
23 and 204, right? Well, and I
think we keep the or because I,
I should not have taken out the
bee. That should be should have
turned into an A on line 20.
Because we're gonna keep that
section C there and turn that
into a B.
Let me, let me, let me
Let me rephrase this.
So,
Before, before, let me, let me
do this, so before we.
You have two specific about the
proposed amendment. I want to
make sure that we hear from a
sponsor, whether she's gonna
consider that constructive or
not and then I wanna kind of
take the temperature of the
committee. First of all, to see
whether it's going to warrant
the the time and attention to
wordsmith. So let me do it, let
me do it that way first. So what
I hear you proposing to do is to
eliminate pill count to make the
penalty enhancement for
trafficking based entirely on
weight and the weight that I
hear you proposing would mirror
the Colorado we, which would be
at 4 g. I understand.
that right?
Um
I thought it would be a 40.
I may have misheard you, but I
heard, I thought I heard you say
4.
No, I was, I was thinking 40,
so, and I got confused because I
heard the sponsors saying
Colorado it's 4 g.
Um, and I see Mr. Baker nodding
his head affirmatively, so
that's why I got confused
between the 40 and the 4, but
your, your proposal is to make a
presumptive trafficking based on
weight alone and in excess of 40
g or more. Is that right? On way
below. Yes, and then you'd have
up to a 5-year enhancement.
So that's the concept. So let me
just get an idea from the
committee members on the concept
and then if there's a buy in,
we'll we'll go into the detail,
but first of all to the sponsor,
uh, sponsor.
Um
Mr. Chair, Senator,
respectfully, it is not
friendly.
Senator Wirth, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I'm actually
comfortable.
I mean, I appreciate Senator
Brantly working through this and
just understanding the or that's
in the pill count did cause me
some concern, but once you have
the oar in there, it kind of
addressed the concern that I
had, and I do think
You know, for those.
Users
Who are out there going campsite
to campsite.
Distributing
That really is a problem.
And again, so it's a fine line,
and the, and the fact that
Colorado's at 4.
Makes me, and I appreciate Mr.
Baker, you've come up with a 10.
10, between 10 and 50.
In this threshold, we're not
going as low as as Colorado.
But I do think
I do, I guess I'm just more
comfortable having the the
flexibility here and, and unders
but I understand the issue too.
I mean, the, the addiction piece
of this is serious, and if it's
just the true addict who was
sitting there with a pile of
pills, it was for them only that
scenario though I think it's
addressed with the judge who
looks at that in ways that
weighs the specifics of it and
what we're dealing with here.
So, again, I, I think I'm
comfortable with, with it the
way, the way it is. I probably
would not support.
And then
Other committee members,
questions that reminds us,
Brantly after that. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Representative
Chandler, I.
Without being too long winded,
I'm, I'm inclined to support the
amendment. I thought Senator
Brownlee's approach was, was a
good idea.
Uh, I would just as soon get rid
of A and B with all due respect,
I, I, I appreciate where the
house is going. I mean, it's
very clever and it's, and it's
addressing kind of the problem.
Uh, given how ent fentanyl is is
ingested and distributed.
I uh
Relatively low dose quantities
of of pills and capsules, you
know, I think the
Whichever is less doesn't work.
Um, because what's, I don't
understand what's less, the
detectable amounts of fentanyl
or the fentanyl powder, so
whichever weighs less.
If we go with the pills and we
use the words containing a
detectable amount, someone it it
contradicts.
Um
It contradicts itself. Someone
could have 10 pills. Someone
could have 100 pills.
Uh
But the 10 pill person has more
detectable amount and the tin
pill person is facing more time
than the 100 person, it's weird.
Um, but it may be good, you
know, you could argue it's good
public policy. My question is,
and I'll just ask it
rhetorically, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Chandler is, how
many fentanyl traffickers have
gotten 9 years in prison.
In the past 6 months. All, all
we gotta do is just.
Successfully convict fentanyl
traffickers and give them max
amount to 9 years, the governor
can use the bully pulpit.
Uh, the judges can can meet, uh,
and have and kind of agree on a
policy, the papers can put their
face on page 3 and, and every
fentanyl drug dealer.
From now till
July 1st gets 9 years, boom,
boom, boom, boom boom.
That creates, it may be unjust.
You know, cause this person
didn't deserve 9 years, but it
creates a general deterrent,
what we have to do is.
Try to remove as much fentanyl
off the streets as we can as
quickly as we can, and the only
way we do that in my opinion, is
with a general deterrent, we
don't use general deterrent in
Mexico.
You know, we think it's unjust
to throw the book at somebody so
that all these folks.
You know, uh, voluntarily comply
with the law.
I think, I think it's just an
extension of failed war on drugs
from the 90s, you know, in the
90s, crack was.
It was horrible and then in the
early 2000s math, oh my God,
math, what are we gonna do and
then then you have frankly more
people dying of oxycodone
overdoses then.
And schedule
Schedule one narcotics, and now
we have fentanyl, so we're
distinguishing between fentanyl
and all the other narcotic
drugs.
Uh, because of the crisis of
homelessness, which is.
In my, you know, which is
exacerbated by failed public
policy with regards to housing.
But anyway, um, so anyway, try
to not be long winded, but I
kind of was, but I I think uh.
I think these are clever. I
think these are awesome, but
until you're showing me that
folks are getting 9 years and
folks are still doing it.
Uh
Enhancing the penalty, um.
For a particular narcotic as
opposed to other horrible
narcotics.
Uh
It just, it's just
A rehash of the 1990s.
Which had failed, failed drug
policies. Lastly, Mr. Chairman,
uh Chandler, the, um,
Uh
In Colorado, is that the
penalty, sir, or or is that the
enhancement?
Uh
That that the 4 ounces or more,
or the 4 g or more.
That is the fentanyl specific
enhancement, 4 to 16 years,
which functions a lot closer to
a mandatory minimum, sorry, Mr.
Chair, Senator Maestas, 4 g is 4
to 16 years as the presumptively
correct sentence, and in
Colorado, you have to argue.
It's not like here where the 3
year enhancement would just be
available. It's a lot closer to
a mandatory minimum. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chandler, gentlemen, so the,
what is the uh underlying
sentence that's being enhanced.
I, I, I'm sorry, Mr. uh Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator Maestas,
that is the sentence for
fentanyl. So I don't know what
the, I don't know the baseline
for drug, drug trafficking, but
It's closer to a mandatory
minimum, it's set at 4 g and
it's 4 to 16. No, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, thank you, gentlemen.
So we misspoke. We use the word
enhancement. It's not an
enhancement, it's a penalty.
The penalty in Colorado is 4 to
16, penalty in New Mexico.
9
If you throw the book at
somebody at 9 years, so.
Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, I suppose my concern with the
amendment would be.
For the same reason I ended up.
Pulling mine back. Is it if I
understood
Your answer to me, it would also
apply to this is that the or
gives the flexibility, correct?
Chairman Cervantes, Senator
Brantly, yes.
OK, and, and I also wanted to
follow up, Mr. Chairman with
something you said, this here is
saying um the proposal in the
amendment is 5 years, 40 g. Did
you say that federal law is 3
years at 440.
Uh, Senator Cervantes, um,
Senator Brantly, uh, no, the
mandatory minimum under federal
law is
40 g
5 years mandatory time.
OK, OK.
40 g, 5 years mandatory.
Yeah
Thank you. I, I, I too want to
support the amendment for the
same reason I wouldn't support
my own amendment because I think
you clarified that in answers,
so thank you.
Anyone else just yet. Let me
weigh in and then we'll come
back to you sooner, so, uh, I'm
hearing a close call with the
pitch seems to be getting close
to the plate, cause I hear so we
uh disfavoring the proposed
amendment, uh, you, Senator
Brantly, just favor in the
amendment. Heen doing seeing the
favor of the amendment. And so
let me weigh in and then I'll
just tell you what we're
probably gonna work on this and
maybe give you specific
language. I just, I have a
question, it's probably for any
of you all can answer. I don't
do criminal law, um, I'm.
Really careful about staying in
my lane. I try really hard to do
that. I'm accused of not staying
in my lane, but, but, uh, uh,
the, in my, my appreciation is
that when it comes to drug.
Enforcement, we're always do it
by weight, um, are there other
places where we do it by pills,
any other, you know, when I hear
heroin, cocaine, marijuana, you
know, it, it's always seems to
be by weight of the drug as
opposed to volume. The reason I
bring this up, I'm smiling, and
this is not a subject to make
light of, but, uh, it'd be like
penalizing marijuana by how many
joints you have and we don't do
it by joints and um.
Conjuring up the scene from
Cheech and Chong's Up in Smoke,
where one joint is, you know, a
whole lid right into one joint
and then, and then you got, you
know, the other people who are
selling joints to, you know,
pencil or toothpick joints, etc.
so we don't do it that way,
right, we don't, we don't
penalize by the joint. We
penalize it by the, the weight,
right, uh, Lyd used to be a,
what about the size of a fist or
something like that, or I, you
know, I've been out of the high
school for a long time. So,
Um, the, the, the, am I right we
do drugs by weight. Don't we
consistently do we do any drug,
uh, penalties or enforcement by
pills, other than this proposal
here.
Cheer er van, um, this is
distinct and it's for the reason
that I expressed that the use of
pills, fake pills, they're not
really pharmaceutical pills to
traffic fentanyl, they're being
broken up and sold as pills. I'm
not aware of another
circumstance where it's.
Delineated this way, but there
is a distinct problem that it's
addressing. I think we're all
aware and very concerned about
it, want to address it. Sounds
like Colorado is really
hammering this and went away
and, um, and I'm wondering why
we're not doing the same, and,
and part of the reason for this
is one of the things that I
think we learned on this
committee through our interim
with the chair and uh chairing
the interim and and through
really the effort leading up to
the special session is we have
an enormous amount of data.
Uh, at our disposal, and so the
question that comes to my mind
is the Colorado enacts this,
did, what was the result? Right?
What does the data show? Did
they see a corresponding
decrease in fentanyl traffic
overdoses uses, is it too early
to draw any conclusions from
Colorado's response. You're
nodding your head, Mr. Baker, so
I'm guessing maybe this is too
recent to be drawing any kind of
uh conclusions from, but we
should be able to do so. We
should be able to see what, what
did Colorado do and what
happened right when they did it.
And, and if they're penalizing
you, what did you say again? At
4 g or what was the, the
sentence, mandatory? Chair of 4
to 16, and it's a presumptively
correct sentence is the term in
Colorado, but functionally much
closer to a mandatory minimum
than discretionary sentencing.
And they said that's at 4 g and
up, upwards of 4 g.
Yes.
So I'm, I'm being referred to
our existing, this is existing
New Mexico law, right? So.
Unlawful trafficking first
offense, second degree felony.
And 2nd and subsequent events,
first degree felony, is that
right? So we've already got some
pretty harsh penalties, I guess
in New Mexico, right, for, for
fentanyl trafficking, is that
right?
Cheer Cervantes, the first
offense is 0 to 9. The average
sentence from the sentencing
commission. It goes dramatically
up with the first degree to
presumptively 18 years is what
you're stuck with, and the
average drug sentence in New
Mexico, according to the
Sentencing commission is 1.77
years. So if you have some
eighteens in there, you gotta
have a lot of zeros, um, to pull
it down to 1.77, and so the idea
here would be that.
The sentencing courts would be
shown by the legislature that
because of the deadliness of
fentanyl, they should take a
look at a bump here above what
they might do for another drug
trafficker in light of the fact
that.
Um, it is as deadly as it is.
So two things I'm observing. So
one is the answer my earlier
question was, this would be a
first time that we're sentencing
anybody for any controlled
substance or drugs based on
pills, uh, and I understand your
explanation is that the fentanyl
is exceptional in some way and
so maybe deserves that different
treatment, but this would be a
first, and I think that's why
we're struggling doing and
Senator Maestas and and me with
doing this by pills, uh, because
it's, it's uncharted really
territory for us, at least in
New Mexico, so, and, and I, I'm
always somewhat resistant when.
comes down to what trying to
reinvent the wheel, right? Uh,
but I, I do understand the
argument that's made, uh, for
that and um.
I, uh, again, I, I struggle with
enforcement for some of the same
reasons that that uh that are
doing this, and I respect the
chair maybe considering this not
constructive with her effort uh
on this too, but it's a
challenge, right? Um, Senator
Worth and I had a good meeting
yesterday with Chairwoman
Chandler and with the speaker
and we debated this around the
round table there for a while
and didn't come to a conclusion
with it either, and said, well,
we'll go here this in the
committee and see where that
takes us, so that's kind of
where we're at right now, so,
um.
Because I think there are at
least 3 of us that would favor
the amendment. I'm gonna ask
Senator Doick if you're still
willing to do so, to state the
amendment and we'll take the
vote and then maybe a a close
vote, we'll see.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, I
I'll say, well, while we've been
talking, I've been looking,
trying to find information about
what's going on in Colorado.
And I see the sense.
The 2022 laws went into effect.
They have an 18.4% increase in
fentanyl deaths.
Since then, but I, I don't think
it is.
If if the goal of this is to
reduce fentanyl deaths. I, I
don't think that we have seen
that in Colorado so far we are
seeing a continuing increase,
um,
But Mr. Chair, uh,
All right, so the amendment
would be
Thank
OK.
All right, Mr. Chair, so my
amendment will be
To, on page 39.
Uh, at the end of line 14,
strike that colon.
Strike sections A and B.
to strike lines 15.
You're 24.
And then line 25 there, get rid
of that subsection C.
This is why what Senator Massas
was was suggesting and, and I
think it makes sense.
So it would be an enhancement of
up to 5 years.
For traffickers who are
Recruiting, coordinating,
organizing, and supervising,
directing, managing or financing
trafficking.
Are you taking out weight then
as well too, Senator, you're,
you're, you're basing
enhancement only based on the
conduct as described in that
subsection C.
Mr. Chair, from me whispering to
you just now, that was my
understanding of, of the
preference. What did I
misunderstand?
Yeah, you did. All right, then
let me restate the amendment. I
was thinking you were back to
the amendment you had stated
earlier, I, I can do that. All
right. So, page 39.
Uh
Striking lines 15 through 19.
14.
No, I'm leaving that because
we're gonna have 2 sections.
So striking lines 15 through 19.
On line 20.
Striking that bee and making
that subsection A.
And then
after the letter.
Did I say the number? said the
subsection, so when I hear you
say you strike in the
subsection, that suggests to me,
you're striking those subs. I,
yes, just that letter, just that
letter be turning that into an
A.
And then
After, so 5 years.
Everything after the word years
from the comma.
All the way through, and that's
on online 20 all the way through
50 on line 23.
And inserting in lieu thereof,
or 40.
And then after the word powder.
That comma through the semicolon
striking the, the comma,
whichever is less.
So the way it would read.
would be that.
Shall be enhanced by up to a.
5 years.
Or 40 g of fentanyl powder.
Or
5 years and then so I'm sorry,
turning that C to a B. 5 years
if the person has recruited,
coordinated, organized,
retained, blah blah blah.
So it'd be 2 subsections, the
first one would provide for
enhancement of up to 5 years for
someone who had 40 g.
to 40 g of um
Fentanyl powder.
And then that other language
that is now C would become B but
would otherwise stay the same.
OK, you were with me, Emily? All
right, uh, back to the sponsor
again, we've tweaked it some. I
still want to get your input. Is
this considered constructive or
not constructive to your
bill, not constructive, Mr.
Chair.
Right, um, and I think, is there
any more question about the
proposed amendment. I'm gonna
summarize my understanding of
it, Senator doing so.
What you're effectively doing is
uh making the enhancement based
on weight of fentanyl at 40 g,
um, and, and also the
enhancement would be retaining
the, the, um, language that I
guess, let's see this is all new
material, so this would be for,
it would also be an enhancement
for the recruitment coordination
and all that other language.
Uh, and so you'd be retaining
all of that. So really what
you're, what it seems to be
you're doing is you're, you're
eliminating the enforcement
based on pills, but
interestingly too sponsor of
what she's doing is she's
reducing.
The amount from 50 to 40, right,
So one argument is this is
tougher.
Then the bill that came to us in
the door, right? In other words,
it's making an enhancement based
on a 40 g threshold as opposed
to your bill, which is a 50 g
threshold, right, without regard
for bills, so there's, there's a
way to argue it, isn't there to
say that this is, this is
tougher on fentanyl,
trafficking, uh, and lowering
the, the threshold for the
enhancement from 50 to 40 so
this is actually tougher, I
think, um, on, on by one
argument, and then, but, but,
but then by another argument by
eliminating the pills.
Maybe not, so it's a little bit
of both. It's kind of half, half
and half, half pregnant,
whatever. Um, but, um, did you
want to respond to my, my sum
summary, I was with you that it
making it tougher.
Yeah, um, that we can have the
debate, but I think everybody
understands the issue, right,
which is the, the, the bill as
it's before us triggers the
enhancement at 50 g on one
alternative, right, as opposed
to the pills, um, and the
proposed amendment triggers it
at 40 g, so that's, that's the
reason I in my mind it's had a
three-year enhancement, which
has been eliminated and it's now
just 5. This is not this is not
easy, gang. Are you having fun
though?
No.
Oh
I did
That's
It is less than 40.
Yeah, you've been hanging around
Senator Munoz too much, um.
Uh, yeah, he has trouble with
math, um.
So
Anyway, we, we, we have a
specific amendment. Let's do a
roll call the amendment, I think
it'll be a.
the Roco, Emily.
Senator Brentley.
Senator Duha yes.
Edna O'Malley?
Senator Paul.
Senator Thornton.
Better or worse.
Themata.
The Cervantes amendment fails.
All right, we're back on the
bill with uh Senator Dewey, you
still have the floor at section
17.
Thank you, Mister Chair, and
This is my, my last one.
That's probably
Um, so on
Page 42.
Um, this is where we're, we're
dealing with, uh,
With Birch Birchfield, um.
The language that is added on
page 42, lines 10 to 19.
I, I think it's still not
allowable under Birchfield.
So Birchfield says, said was
Ah, if you got pulled over for a
DUI.
Um, you can and you.
You, you can refuse to do a
breath test, and that takes, you
get your license revoked, um,
you can, you can be.
There there are consequences for
that.
Ah, if you refuse.
To do a blood test.
Uh, you can't have additional
criminal sanctions placed on you
for that refusal.
Um, because a blood test is much
more invasive.
Than, than a breath test. And
you, if you threaten someone
with criminal sanctions for
refusing that invasive
warrantless search cause that
those tests are, they, they are
a search constitutionally, and
they would be doing them without
a warrant, um.
You can't coerce someone into
agreeing to that search by
dangling the threat of criminal
sanctions over them.
And so that is Supreme Court law
and what this added language
does is it says that
But if you
Refuse that blood test, that
warrantless blood test that you
then, you're charged becau um
can become aggravated. You get
an additional criminal sanction.
On top of it. So I, I don't
think this.
Meets the birch field test. Now,
if you want to revoke their
license, you can totally do
that. If you want to hold it
against them like in an
evidentiary way like it can be
used to get their refusal can be
used against them.
The Supreme Court says that is
OK.
But
Threatening them with criminal
sanctions for that refusal.
Uh, and it doesn't mean no blood
tests can happen. It means you
got to get a warrant.
For it. You just can't do a
warrantless search.
Uh, and then criminally punish
people for refu for saying no,
I, I refuse that warrantless
search. And so I think that this
language.
I don't think this language
fixes the birch field problem. I
think that this would still be
so has constitutional problems.
Under that
That's case law. And I was
looking around trying to find
other cases in other states.
Um
And that would convince me
otherwise. Ah.
And, and I have, I am, I remain
unconvinced. Um, so I don't
know.
Uh, Mr. Baker, Ms. Dorsey, if
you.
You all have found the, the
magic case that that would
overrule Birchfield, but I think
absent that, at a Supreme Court
law, and we're, we're stuck with
it.
And so my, my
suggestion, Mr. Chair, because
I, I don't know.
I don't know how to fix it, um,
so it would be to strike this
added language on page 42 lines
uh 0 through 19, it would be to
strike that added language.
To the proposed amendment is on
page 42, striking.
Lines 10 through 19 0 that to
the extent of new language, is
that right, the entirety of
that?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
Uh, representative.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, that's a
friendly.
Yes, sure. That's a yes, if you
want to call it constructive,
I'll go with that. Yeah, we're
all friendly. I mean, if we
don't ever want to be
unfriendly, so everything's
friendly around here.
Uh, so we have a proposed
amendment, Senator Stewart,
you're catching up with us and
so I appreciate you joining us
and I know you've had a busy
afternoon already, so we're on a
proposed amendment to what would
be.
Uh, section 20 right on line on
page 41, but it really
operatively on page 42 striking
subsection B and the sponsor
says this is constructive, so
we'll go to the committee. I, I
have a question. I don't know
for Mr. Baker. I bet you know
the answer to this, or Miss
Dorsey. Um, I don't know the
answer to this, which is if, if
the court was to find subsection
B unconstitutional. In a court
sever this section from the
enactment or with the entire
bill be?
unconstitutional, and we lose
the whole thing, entire uh bill.
For the sake of that
unconstitutional provision here.
I don't know, I'm sure there's a
case on this. I just don't know
what that law is. Anybody know?
It's essentially a saving, you
know, and those of us that do
civil practice, right, call it a
saving clause in a contract,
right, which is essentially we
put in language in our contracts
to say that some part of this
contract is deemed to be
unlawful for some reason, the
rest of it is saved by the
saving clause or severability,
yeah, but I, I don't know how
that works in the context of
this type of an enactment. If
this was just curious, do you
know, Miss Dorsey, if this is
deemed unconstitutional. There
seems to be a consensus, it is,
then, um, I shouldn't say
consensus, there's
There's several of us that it's
probably unconstitutional. If it
is, is that, does it take down
the whole bill?
Uh, German senators, I don't
know for certain. I'm not aware
of any case law directly on
point, uh, but it seems that
that is Yeah, we don't, I don't
think the sponsor wants to
either. I don't think any of us
want to, but I, I want, I want
the, uh, your members committee
to understand the implications
of this, right, which is, it
sounds like you don't want to
take that risk and I I'd still
like to know the answer, but I
don't have it, and I'm looking
around the room. I don't think
anybody here does, and we've got
a lot of smart lawyers in the
room, so.
Somebody's got a research
project for the night, I think,
depending on how the bill goes,
so, uh, we're on a proposed
amendment, other discussion on
the proposed amendment, Senator
Thornton.
Mr. Chair, I, I actually thank
you for bringing this. I had
marked this as an issue for me,
not being a lawyer, not not
being able to quote the.
Supreme Court based on this, but
it did.
raise a concern that someone
could be coerced into taking a
test that they didn't want to
take.
So I was going to raise the same
very same issue. So I'm glad
that
If this amendment gets approved
that it's stricken from the
spill, um, so I appreciate that
and I'm gonna, I, I swear to
God, by the time I leave this
place, I'm going to be a lawyer.
But
thank you for that you get
elected a 4-year term in law
school is only 3, so
very, very, very doable.
Very doable, uh, on a proposed
amendment, anyone else? I'll
just suggest to you, um,
Senator, it's, it's a good idea
and the staff will be happy to
get it to you. You should reach
the Birchville case. It's an,
it's an interesting read and the
Supreme Court said that a breath
alcohol test is less, so, so
less invasive than a blood draw,
that they'll allow that with
some level of consequence for
not taking a breath test,
including a criminal penalties
and a loss of license
administratively, but a blood
draw, the Supreme Court.
that is uh substantially more
invasive. And so they put
restrictions on when you can and
cannot do that too, so, so we're
a good read, um, my, my question
is, if we strike this language,
are we still allowing for a use
of the blood draw for
misdemeanor crimes, that's been
the concern, I think, too. And
so we're not doing harm to that
goal of this bill, is that
right?
and
Um, Mr. Chair, that's my
understanding. All right. Right
now, my understanding is that
we're precluded by your existing
law from taking a blood draw
other than in felony arrests and
not for misdemeanor, but we
would with this passage of this
bill, even with this amendment,
we'd still be able to do a blood
drive on a misdemeanor DWI
correct.
Right.
Uh, other discussion questions
on the proposed amendment. Is
there any objection to adopting
that amendment?
Seeing none show all members
supporting the amendment, that
amendment's adopted.
Uh, so, I think you still have
the floor, but I think you told
me I'm, I'm done.
Other committee members on the
bill as amended, Senator
Maestus. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, uh,
Lieutenant Chandler Dorsey and
just
I'll take a minute to just
appreciate the work you've done
the past year I'm sure just
tremendous, tremendous but uh
the the hearings you put
together in the summer and to
work on this bill. A couple
quick questions back on the
On the drug portion of the bill
on page 39.
Uh
On lines 1923, we say whichever
is less.
So
To me, that doesn't make any
sense, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Chandler, so whichever is less,
so less in terms of the amount
of pills.
Or less in terms of the weight.
Because there's two different.
There's two different
The math doesn't jive over here,
you're counting the pills, and
over here you're measuring the
weight and then you're saying,
whichever is less.
Please explain that.
Cheer Cervantes, Senator
Maestas, the way that it would
work would be
Cops come in, they do the bust.
There's a stash of pills, they
count the pills, there's 410.
They do the drug analysis and
the weight is below the
threshold for the enhancement.
Um
You can, you can take either of
them to get to the numbers. So
you'd still be able to use the
enhancement cause you're over
400 pills.
Even if it was below the weight
threshold.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
gentlemen. No, I understand
that, but I don't understand the
magic words, whichever is less
and what you're telling me is
whichever is more.
You just describe whatever is
more, whatever is.
I don't understand what it
means.
Whichever is less, it makes
absolutely no sense to me. If
somebody could help me out.
Less than what?
Over here you're talking about
the number of pills, or we are
talking about.
Wait
Whichever is less.
I don't understand that.
Um, Mr. Chairman, a
representative China.
Senator Maest like.
I don't know if I can explain it
better without.
Um, maybe having a
Box of fentanyl pills to, to try
to go through on some drug tests
to show the counts, and I'm not
being, I'm not minimizing your
question. I'm just saying,
articulating it is a little
tricky, but I think that it
would allow law enforcement to
take.
Either of those into account and
present it to the judge and the
judge could say, you either had
400 pills or you have the drug
quantity amount, and if you
trigger it under either of the
so you're giving two different
metrics, I understand that 100%,
so can we just strike?
The words whichever is less.
I totally understand where
you're going with that, it's an
either or. The government has an
either or.
Uh
I totally understand that, but
you're trying to imply.
That, that the government's
gonna go with the least amount
of
The least amount of
Something
And, and that implication is
incorrect.
Um, Mr. Chair, we can live with
that.
striking, um, whichever is left,
yeah, on line 19 and 23.
Um
I'm not making that amendment
because I don't like that
section, but my next question of
Mr. Chairman's Representative
Chandler. Well, by all means, by
all means, apologies. I, I'll
make the amendment. I moved to
strike up.
Comma, whichever is less on line
19.
And on page 39. Thank you,
ma'am, madam proton page 39.
Uh, line 19 strike, comma,
whichever is less.
And on line 23 strike, comma,
whichever is less.
And my, my sponsors that's uh
constructive that's a friendly.
I'm not gonna change, Mr. Chair,
it's friendly
of Mexico. Nothing sacrosanct
anymore.
All right.
You can use friendly. It's a
friendly minute.
No
Mr. Chair, help, help me out
here. I understand what we're
trying to do, and
Except when I look at the
numbers.
Back to math.
Um, it says 3 years if the
person is in possession of 100.
And 500 pills, capsules,
tablets.
My, so it seems to me that the
minimum here is 100.
So why can't we just say if the
person is in possession of 100
pills.
Capsules, tablets, or more.
And then, and then when you get
down to the other one, between
10 to 50 g, which why don't we
just say between 10 g or more.
Just to, because you're looking
at the minimum amount, which
would trigger, I understanding
this correctly?
Why, why 10 to 50 versus.
100 to 500 and 500. In other
words, it seems like you have a
minimum amount that should be a
requirement, anything more than
that would also trigger.
Am I reading this incorrectly?
Cervantes and Senator Thornton,
you aren't reading it correctly,
but I think that the reason for
the limiting language is to make
it clear that the 5-year
enhancement kicks it, you're
sandwiching between 0 to the 1st
bomb.
And then you've got this, you're
delineating where the 3 year
bump applies, and then you go
above that to 55 or more if you,
if you take out the cabinning.
I think it becomes unclear if
it's 3 and a 5 year enhancement,
or if it's just one or the
other. And I want to be clear on
that. OK, thank you. That's the
clarification I needed. I
appreciate that.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We do that motion. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman Rosen Steer, and
then on that same page, the word
powder, the word powder.
Um
I understand the distinction
between the the pills and the
and the powder, but.
What if the fentanyl, that, that
the trafficker has is
Not powder.
But if it's solid.
Does does that person have a
defense, and so that begs the
question, do we wanna say
powder, do we wanna say product?
We want to say uh uh detectable
fentanyl.
This powder
Uh, what if the fentanyl is a
You know
Hill like a really hard pill
that you can't crunch up and and
it doesn't have powder.
Um, er Cervantes Senator
Maestas, my understanding that
the powder.
I think, let me check this, but
I believe it's taken from
federal law, um, where they use
amounts, but when they test a
thought, like if you made a
brick of fentanyl instead of
pills, you would break it down
into the powder and they would
run the test on the, on the
powder itself. So, even if it's,
or even if the seizure occurs as
a solid.
The test is grams if it's a
powder. And so you've broken it
down if it's Mr. Chairman.
and gentleman, so it's, it's
powder like it is does the word
is the word powder in federal
law.
Because I understand the weight.
I understand how you acquire the
weight.
But I don't, but if powder is
not used anywhere else, it's
just kind of a weird.
Word and.
In a drug case.
I think defense lawyers would
have.
Would have fun with that.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Chandler, why, why do we have
powder and, and do we want the
word powder in there?
I would suggest, Mr. Chairman of
fentanyl product.
It's my understanding that um
with some consultation here, um,
from those who have, uh,
prosecuted fentanyl cases
directly, um.
That it's, even if it's pressed
into a pill, it's still treated
as a powder because it's just
pressed into that shape. So, the
testing would remain the same,
and that's the metric.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
No, I'm aware of that. All
right, great. The, uh, with
regards to the.
The birch field.
There's, there's, uh, the
nomenclature is the Burke's
Birchfield fix, you know, the
Supreme Court decided something
that was quite obvious to me and
we have to fix it. I think we
have to fix anything.
Birchfield decision draws a
clear line of where the Fourth
Amendment is drawn with regards
to the government invading your.
person
And so
Why do we have to
Why does the government have
access to someone's blood on a
misdemeanor, you know what I
mean? And so, so let's talk
about DWIs for a second, Mr.
Chairman Representative
Chandler. DWIs.
Um
There are 2 problems with this.
One is just in general, DWIs is
storytelling.
I know that the prosecutor has
to check off a bunch of stuff
when they do the trial, uh, but
it's storytelling, it's telling
a story of someone who had
impaired driving, if it's not a
roadblock, impaired driving.
How someone acted when you pull
them over whether they have
fumbled fingers, slurred speech,
bloodshot, watery eyes, whether
they use their hand to get out
of the vehicle, there's all
kinds of indicia of
intoxication.
And then you ask them to do
standardized field sobriety
tests which have been
scientifically.
proven to show
That if somebody, you know.
doesn't do well on these tests,
that there's an incredibly high
statistical probability that
they're 10 or greater.
The legislators bumped it to a
0.08.
I bumped it down, and if they
refuse.
To produce a chemical test,
that's a consciousness of guilt.
So, and, and Mr. Chairman Rosen
Chandler.
Unlike the last time this bill
was debated, that I recall we
have video evidence.
Video evidence of the person,
though the jury or the judge
could actually see the person
use common common sense
knowledge to determine uh if
they're impaired.
Uh
So that's one thing I don't
think the government needs to
hold someone down and suck out
their blood.
To get a conviction on a DWI.
case, I think you just need to
present the case.
Uh, with a, with a qualified
officer and a
And a competent prosecutor, 12
is
The government has the choice.
The the defendant or the suspect
rather doesn't choose which test
they take the government
chooses.
And so we don't have the DWI
statute in front of us. This is
the driving on a revoked statue,
which kind of weird, but the
government shall choose, it is.
Implied consent when you get a
driver's license, you, you agree
that if you're ever accused of
DWI, you, you, you give consent
to a chemical test at the
choosing of the officer, so the
officer can take, take a breath
test or a blood test or both.
If somebody takes a breath test,
and they blow a 0.8 or greater,
there is no need for a blood
draw.
This doesn't address that at
all. This doesn't address that
in the slightest. The, the
officer.
Under this
Can get a warrant for a blood
draw.
Even after a person blows 0.08.
That makes no sense.
Um, now, if a person blows a
0.02 and they're showing.
You know,
Strong signs of impairment, I
would suggest you don't need the
blood draw.
But a blood draw takes hours,
but do we want to take an
officer's?
Off the streets for 23 hours to
get a blood draw when they could
prosecute the case successfully
without the blood draw. So.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chandler, why do we need, why,
why does the government need to?
Uh, why do we need to move the
Fourth Amendment, uh.
Across the street to get a blood
draw on a
Uh petty misdemeanor.
The policy argument, Mr. Chair,
is.
It adds additional certainty as
to what.
The
Person's status is in terms of
their intoxication.
Chairman Senator, thank you for
the question. I, I think I
understand what you're trying to
get at. I can summarize.
Briefly
Why are we doing this?
Um, I believe that when this
bill was.
Originally dreamed up in the
house. It was responsive to
requests from law enforcement
who was feeling frustrated by an
inability to
Prove
Drug related DWIs.
And uh it was an effort to seek
admissible evidence that could
help prove up those cases, in
part because in our uh law
enforcement across the state,
there's a very limited number of
DREs, drug recognition experts
who are specifically trained to
identify clues of impairment
that correlate to drugs in
particular.
And because there are a limited
number of DREs and particularly
for those who are
Trying to protect the public in
more rural communities. This was
an effort to secure evidence
that would be admissible in
court, in addition to the types
of evidence you've already
described.
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Representative John story, you
know, that's the policy argument
behind it.
Um
But I think, I think officers
are.
I think the officers and the
prosecutor can get a successful
prosecution because believe it
or not, the majority of these
guys admit to the drug use that
that just it's it's amazing how
they admit to the drug use, but
if someone were to admit and and
the law doesn't care what
impairs you.
Uh, but this, this build up.
This bill does care. If someone
admits to taking 8 Xanax pills.
Um
Uh, or 8 prescribed oxycodone
pills.
And they're clearly impaired.
And they refuse a blood draw.
And the, and the under this
bill, can the judge issue a
warrant?
Uh, Chairman Senator, yes, um,
under this bill, the officer
could use that admission.
To seek a search warrant through
a judicial officer, um, I'm sure
you remember from the days of
prosecuting that under the
doctrine of corpus delecti and
admission alone is not enough to
convict somebody, and so this
would provide officers with an
opportunity to seek that search
warrant to get the scientific
evidence they would need to
prove their case in court.
However, to your earlier point,
there's nothing in this bill
that requires an officer to do
so. So if an officer in their
judgment believed that they had
sufficient evidence to convict.
based upon the individual's
behavior, their driving pattern,
the way they performed on field
sobriety tests if those were
conducted and whatever evidence
was captured on their body worn
camera, it would not be required
to go and seek a search warrant
and waste their valuable time.
it is only necessary when the
officer, thank you very much,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Ms.
Dorsey. So on.
So that begs the question. I
think you may have answered it
in my mind, but if you look on
page 42.
on page 42.
Representative Chandler on on
lines 3 and line 7 that talk
about the warrant.
It says under the influence of
alcohol.
Or a controlled substance.
A controlled substance.
So
The, the, the, the human body
doesn't care if it's legal or
illegal.
DWI law doesn't care if it's
legal or illegal. Alcohol is
legal.
The folks over 21. It, it, the
law cares if you're impaired.
This says it has to be illegal.
So if a drug is legal, the way I
read this.
The judge can't get a warrant.
So those are contradictions that
that just cannot stand in in in
criminal law, and I I just.
I just, I'm opposed to that,
that section of the of the bill.
I don't know why that's in there
when we do to answer Senator
O'Malley's question from
earlier, we, we do, uh,
We combine tax bills, we
combine.
We combine a
Crime bills where there's
consensus. I, I, I never, I
never
I don't believe this particular
bill ever reached that consensus
point as an individual
standalone bill.
So I'm just, just, just
expressing my disappointment as
to why it's in there.
Um, and then lastly, Mr.
Chairman, um,
Uh
On the competency, tremendous
work, tremendous tremendous
work.
And this, this statute, Mr.
Chairman and Chandler, has not
been uh amended.
Since 1988.
1988, and folks were talking
about competency in researching
competency this summer, there
was law review articles from the
60s.
Where intellectuals and whoever
were talking about how do we
move into this modern world.
Dealing with competency and and
and so here we are in now.
You know, Chucks.
count, but 1988, so anyway,
shout out to.
Madam Chair, for, for, for
improving and modernizing the
statute. But what we're looking
at the '88 law.
Let's look at page 27.
And page 29.
Um
In a competency, you know,
anyone can raise the issue, Mr.
Chairman Prosecutor Judge
defense lawyer can raise the
issue of competency and
everything stops, boom.
So if you look on page 20.
26 on page 26.
And on page 29, and if you hold.
Page 27 and 28, you can look at
both of them lines one.
upon a motion on page 26, line
one, Mr. Chairman, upon a motion
of the defense.
And then on page 29, upon a
motion of any defendant.
Um, so, one is, it's defendant,
it's not the defense even though
the lawyer may make the motion
he's representing the defendant,
but
Do we want any party, do we, do
we want to say any party or
that's strictly the role of the
defense.
In, in, in that in that section
of law.
We want to say upon a motion of
the of a party or just leave it
on a motion of the defendant.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator, very
good catch.
I think it would be our
preference that any party can
raise the issue of competence.
And, um, I think the other
I think the earlier section may
cover it, but just in case, Mr.
Chairman, uh, you know, let's do
a few things. You're bombing
here, Senator, so let's let's,
let's do a couple of things. One
is that last amendments that you
made striking the or less, we
didn't, Emily's reminding me, we
didn't take action on that, so I
need you to make that amendment
again, um, and let's take a vote
on that, make sure we've got
that recognized, thank you,
Emily. And then, um, and then,
yeah, if you got a motion, you
got something to to uh uh do it.
Let's, let's, let's get to it.
So, first of all, that last
amendment that you made, I
think, um, some of the members
out the room, would you make
that again? Let's get a quick
quote on that one. You recall
that.
Thank you, and I'll just make
the motions and you get friendly
or not friendly. Um, so on page
26.
Page 26, line 1.
Um, hold on a second.
No, no, no. Oh, you want to go
back to the, OK, great, on page
39, yes, forgive me, on page 39,
on page 39.
Line 19. I, I move, uh, on page
on on on line 19 and 23, I moved
that we strike comma, whichever
is less.
I thought we had that, but is
there any objection to adoption
of that amendment?
None, thank you, Emily. There's
none, so that's adopted center I
interrupted you, but that I need
to get that cleaned up. So thank
you and if we have other
amendments, let's get to a
motion here shortly. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and then if we can
look on page 2.
Lying one.
Strike
The defense.
An insert in Lutherof.
A party or judge.
Or I guess the judge doesn't
make a motion, but it would a
party worker.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, if I may,
please, uh, I believe in other
provisions of the bill, we have
it listed as a party or the
court in case the judge wants to
make it sua sponte. And I would
suggest incorporating all either
a party or the court. It could
be the, the defense, the
prosecution, and the court or a
party in the court, whichever
the committee prefers.
And I would insert and there of
a party or the court.
And strike the defense.
That's a friendly.
All right. Is there any
objection to adopting that
amendment? No, that amendment's
adopted.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh
Chandler, and then on page 29.
On page 29, uh, line 2.
strike any defendant.
And insert in lie thereof a
party.
Or the court
Mr.
Chair, that's a, this is so
spot, right?
Um
Any discussion on the amendment?
And are you still with me?
Any objection to the amendment
saying none bad amendments
adopted, Senator Maestus.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I appreciate the
work that Senator Deig did saved
me an hour, but that, that
competence is uh bill is
awesome. It's, it's awesome. I
don't know if I can.
I'm gonna have to look for my
parachute pants, uh, from the
90s to to consider some of the
other provisions.
But um
But I, but the competency a
portion of the bill is
outstanding, and I thank you for
your work, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr.
uh, Mr. Chair, I make a do pass
motion on the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 as amended.
Thank you. Any further
discussion?
Any committee members at all?
Um, I, before we take the vote,
I'd just like to thank again the
sponsor and for all of you for a
good hearing. I, I, I know, let
me anticipate, I see the press
in the room and I, we heard from
the chamber of commerce and we
heard from the business
coalition. Now let me anticipate
the criticism that we're hearing
that this does not go far enough
or this is not enough, uh, I
will ask everyone to know we're
not even at the midpoint of this
session where you're still
having bills introduced, we've
got a number of bills that
relate to public safety and
crime.
this committee that are still
coming up. We're just getting
warmed up and, and that's not to
in any way minimize the effort
of the house, you all spent 3
hard weeks working on this and a
lot of time during the interim,
and we got teed up for this with
the request at the special
session and it's taken us all of
the 6 months since then to get
the work uh that's before us to
where it's at. So, I want to
recognize that and, and just
tell everyone to stay tuned.
Uh, we're on a Du pass motion as
amended.
Any objection?
Uh, Senator Thornton, uh, all
other members in uh Oedis and
objection. So Senator Me and
Senator Thornton,
I love you.
No, no. Oh, OK, we read a book.
You want to do a roll call,
we'll do that. Um how about I do
this, I'll let you explain your
vote, uh, Senator Thornton,
how's that? So let us take the
roll call vote and let you feel,
feel your comments are going to
change votes. Well, I think I
still have some questions,
right. Well, I, I thought we
were going through and still
debating the bill, so that's
right.
Go ahead, I'll.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I, and then
these are just basic questions.
A lot of them were brought up by
Senator Du Hagan. Thank you for
that. You clarified a lot of the
issues that I was gonna raise
and so that was very helpful.
And I guess my, mine are more
fundamental questions in terms
of.
Um
Try to understand this bill and,
and the ramifications of the
bill. So the first question is
in regards to page 3.
And it was with respect to the,
uh question with regards to
To the, the defendants raising.
Competency being brought to the
district courts.
And, and so,
I think I understand the
rationale behind that. But my
question was, do the district
courts have the capacity to
handle all these behavioral
health issues as they start
coming up, going through this
new process that we're laying
out.
Chairman Senator, thank you for
the question, a very important
one as I'm sure you are all
hearing that our courts are
slammed, which is absolutely
true. Um, however, I believe the
answer to your question, sir, is
yes.
Um, we, in the course of the
interim have had many meetings
on this particular topic and
have heard from a variety of
stakeholders and interested
parties that competency is
raised and addressed in
somewhere between 2 and 5% of
criminal cases. Uh, we heard as
high as 5, we heard as low as 2,
which is a very small percentage
of the total criminal cases our
justice system sees, um, most of
these cases where competency is
all of these cases were
competency is raised are
currently addressed in the
district court except for in the
metropolitan court in
Albuquerque.
And so Senator Maestas was
correct that the amendment that
was proposed and adopted did
remove the metropolitan courts
jurisdiction to address
competency, but if anything that
could lead to improved
efficiency, we hope that, uh,
jurisdictions that have higher
numbers of competency cases,
create competency dockets where
we're having judges,
prosecutors, and, and defense
attorneys who specialize in this
niche area of law addressing
these Thank you for that.
Uh, Mr. Chair,
Um
So
But now on to page 4 of my
question was with regards to
evaluation process, uh.
So how long does it take for an
evaluation to occur once the
defendant is held.
Chairman Senator, a great
question with an unfortunate
lawyer answer, it depends. Um,
each case is unique and it
depends upon the individual
defendant, uh, or individuals
who have never been in the
criminal justice system before
it may take longer for those
that are frequent flyers, it
should be more expedient.
Um, part of the expanded
evaluation will require
evaluators to do extra work, um,
which may require looking,
seeking and reviewing mental
health records, previous
criminal case records, if, if
those exist, um, and so in each
case, it'll depend upon the
individual person's personal
history, their criminal history,
their willingness to participate
in the evaluation as well as
where they're housed. Are they
incarcerated? Does the evaluator
need to
travel to see them, um, are they
in the community and available
to show up in the person at the
evaluator's office. Thank you
for that.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you for that. My, so
the question I have then is,
while we're waiting for this
evaluation, is the defendant
released? Is the defendant held?
Uh, and so again, it's the
question of how long are we
holding them prior to making a
decision whether or not they're
competent.
Chairman, Senator, and another
fabulous question. I appreciate
that. And again, unfortunately,
the answer is it depends. Um, so
take, to take a step back in
every single criminal case
before competency is ever
raised, the first hearing when
somebody is charged with a crime
is either an arraignment or a
first appearance where they're
told what they're charged with,
with the maximum penalty they
could receive if convicted is,
and in those cases, the judge
determines is the person
dangerous or not, and based upon
that determination decides.
Are they going to be held in
custody while the case is
pending, or are they going to be
released to the community. In
most cases, competency isn't
raised until after that first
setting after usually the
defense attorney has had an
opportunity to get to know their
client and to evaluate the
strength of their ability to
understand the court process.
Of course, there are cases where
we, and we have heard about some
in Las Cruces where there are
people who have been through the
system multiple times in those
circumstances, competency might
be raised at that first hearing,
that is not typical, um, so the
initial dangerousness hearing
about pretrial detention occurs
before competency is ever taking
place.
However, there is a subsequent
dangerousness evaluation, uh,
once competency is raised, the
judge has to decide or when the
evaluation comes back, the
initial evaluation comes back
and says we don't believe this
defendant is competent. The
judge is then required to decide
is this person dangerous or not,
if they are dangerous, then they
are sent to Vegas to BIH where
they are committed for
competency restoration for a
maximum of 9 months. If they are
not dangerous because
they're not charged with or
likely to commit one of the
enumerated violent offenses that
we've outlined, and they are
released, and at that point in
time, there's a choice made. Are
they sent to outpatient,
non-incarceral restoration
programming, or is the criminal
case dismissed so that they can
pursue civil proceedings and
involuntary treatment.
Thank you for that.
So valuating these competency
my, my, my question then is, um,
Have you worked with the
evaluators to understand it.
I guess the question that uh it
keeps coming up is.
How many evaluators do we have
in the system right now to, to,
to determine whether or not
someone is competent or and have
you worked with the group that
does that evaluation to see
whether or not they're going to
be able to handle the increased
cases if this goes forward.
We, as you heard, um, senator
and chairman are investing and
expanding our behavioral health
system.
Um
The Senate has been showing
leadership on that and
coordination with the house. It
is our expectation that the
investments that we're making on
the on the behavioral health
side will also be investments on
needs of the courts and other
evaluation systems, so, um, if
there is a gap, and I wouldn't,
um, dispute there, there may be
a gap. The intent is to expand
on services. I did, um, have
conversations with um UNM as I
was trying to understand.
this process, they actually have
a forensic training.
Program at um I think it's the
medical school, um, Mr. Chair,
and Senator, so they I did
consult with them on the
processes that we were
developing and the needs for
additional forensic
psychologists and the like, so.
Do we have it, the, the
resources now, maybe not, but
certainly I know that we were
all talking about this would be
part of the expansion of the
behavioral health system, Mr.
Chair and Senator.
Thank you for that.
Mr. Sheera, so, so my, my big,
my big concern here is, is we're
gonna be bringing up, let's
assume we bring on more
evaluators.
Um
We're putting a lot of pressure
on them to make an evaluation on
an individual.
Uh, psychological.
Whatever
And my concern here is what?
What culpability do they have if
they make the wrong decision, or
are they culpable?
The civil liable if they, they
make the wrong decision on the
person and say, I think they're
OK to release this person goes
out and commits a crime.
Who's responsible?
Chairman and senator, thank you
for the question. They would not
be liable for making the
incorrect decision because
they're not the ones that
actually make the decision.
What happens is the evaluators
who absolutely have a very heavy
burden and will have an expanded
scope of work should this
legislation pass and be signed
by the governor. We recognize
that.
Uh, we recognize that we need
more of them, that they need to
be funded well and trained well.
Um, but what happens in the
court system is that an
evaluator conducts an
evaluation, that report is
presented to the parties and to
the judge.
And the judge is the one who
makes the determination about
whether a person is competent or
not.
And so there is also available
in the court system the
possibility for what we call
Battle of the Experts. So if the
court ordered evaluation that is
sought by a prosecutor, for
example, if the defense attorney
disagrees with the opinions that
are produced in that report.
There are more than capable of
hiring their own expert to
conduct a separate evaluation,
those evaluators would then
testify in court and it would be
up to the judge to make a final
determination. And as you may be
where there are um immunities
for judges who make those types,
thank you for that, uh, I see my
doctor over there, uh, the
Do you want to comment on that?
Do you have some, some concerns
about what you just heard.
Oh, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
It's a good practice not to do
that because you'll be here
weeks. Got you. We go out to the
audience, everyone in the
audience. I just want to weigh
in, so we don't do that.
uh and senator, if I may add for
you in case this provides any
measure of comfort, um, in the
course of working on this piece
of legislation.
Uh, Cha Chandler did meet with
the Department of Health.
Um, Doctor Tim Shields.
And um
And we have received many and we
incorporated several amendments
that they suggested into this
bill to hopefully facilitate.
Thank you.
I think
Maybe the rest of this was
already taken care of, uh, and
an ambiguity question on
reasonable time, I think uh
Senator Duhe already took care
of that.
I believe that may cover most of
my concerns.
So I think you've done a lot in
this bill, um.
It's, I personally believe it
doesn't go far enough, but I
also believe we need something
in place to move us in the right
direction.
So I've been struggling with, do
I want to support this bill or
not? Had we
And mended it with the senator's
amendment.
That would have taken out the
fentanyl, I probably would have
voted no, but I think I'm gonna
go ahead and support this bill.
Thank you very much.
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
apologize for not being here all
afternoon. I've been in Senate
finance all afternoon.
Um, so,
And I appreciate our staff
giving me up to date on the
amendments, but
What what committees sometimes
forget is to amend the title.
After they have amended the
bill.
I chatted briefly with Senator
Dohag.
Uh, she, she looked at page 2
lines 6 through 9 sort of
questioning because.
And, and, and I don't know, I,
I, I haven't been here, so I, I
could be wrong about this, but
I'm 42 when you uh
Remove be, I think that's what
this is talking about.
Uh, so I don't have an
amendment. I, I'm just uh
concerned that the title may
need amending, and I, I don't
know how to do that.
I mean, I don't know how to
change it and maybe not.
To strike
That language, which is uh
Page 42 subsection B.
So does the strike in that
subsection require amendment to
the title. So Mr. Chair, that's
what I was wondering about, but
Mr. Cummings just said that
we're still amending the
requirements of obtaining a
warrant. So, so I think it's OK
to leave it there.
I does not need to be amended,
but it's a good reminder that we
have to be
Looking at everything.
All right, thank you. You're
still on the floor. Anything
else, Senator Stewart? No.
Brantley. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I, I recognize that we
have been here a long time.
Um
But, but I also hope you
recognize a lot of times lawyers
looking at strikes and ands and
O's and so if you'd allow us
just a few questions.
For some
To address some general concerns
because there's a lot of people
in the public who want to know
what what is really in this bill
and so I am gonna be fast. I
wanna follow up very briefly on
what Senator uh Thornton was
asking about, and that's just
the capacity that these district
courts have specific to.
Uh the forensic evaluators. How
many do we have in the state of
New Mexico now.
Madam Chair, I believe Senator
Thornton asked that. I don't
have that answer. I heard a
number on the account.
In front of me, I heard a number
or something on the order of 20
but I can't tell you if that's
the correct answer, that's the
case, Madam Chairman, if I, if I
refer you just to clarify on the
bottom of page 5 competency
hearing.
Continues over to page 6, shall
be held within 30 days from the
date of an evaluation report
when it is submitted.
So it could be in theory.
Months before an evaluation.
Report is submitted, correct,
with our lack of personnel.
Or, or explain to me, explain to
me how we would make sure that
these are this process is
expedited if we have such a
shortage of evaluators out
there.
Well, I, I'm not sure we
established there was a shortage
of evaluators.
I don't know how to answer that
question. You put deadlines in
statutes and they're expected to
be met. And as I said, Madam
Chair, um, sorry, I'm getting
tired, obviously, senator, um,
Chairman.
We are expanding our capacity in
these arenas and that's our
expectation that there will be
um better access to evaluators,
Mr. Chair and Senator. OK, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I, I hope there will be too. I
guess my question is, is.
If
If there isn't the work stuff to
do, what happens in law if we
put deadlines in statute that
just simply cannot be met
because there isn't the
personnel. What are the
consequences of that. Senator,
the attorneys bring that to the
attention of the judge and the
judge decides how the case
proceeds.
OK. Thank you.
I think other than that than
what he highlighted with
personnel statutes, I think that
the competency.
Um portion of this bill is
It solid, and I've heard from a
lot of law enforcement, um, both
just in my district and, and
really throughout the state as
we've been meeting who are
happy. Some complain that maybe
doesn't go far enough, but
certainly, certainly it's a
really good start. I want, I, I
do want to, and I know we're in
a hurry, but I do briefly want
to discuss section 10, because
if there were any major concerns
to a certain population, it's to
make sure that there's not an
overreach is that when we target
criminals with weapons. We are
not.
Inadvertently targeting
law-abiding citizens, and so
we've had some, some lengthy
debate and conversations, um,
but I wanna make sure that those
listening received the same
answers that we did.
Mr. Chairman, Representative.
Does a Glock switch, which is,
which is what section 10 is
addressing.
Have any purpose other than
turning a legal weapon.
Into an illegal weapon.
No. Thank you. And Mr. Chairman,
I, I think that when we say the,
because of that, it is
concerning to say that we are
outlying.
A device.
But it is a device that clearly
for no other purpose would be to
take a otherwise legal weapon in
the entire purpose of this could
only be to make an illegal
weapon, of course, once it's on
and, and I, and I'll tell you,
representative, the reason why
we had this conversation, should
we include language in there
that it's not illegal until it
becomes attached to the weapon,
and it was, it was clarified to
us by law enforcement that could
take a matter of seconds, and at
that point it's already illegal.
Once it's attached to the
weapon, so to clarify for those,
I know there's a lot of concern
out there and maybe
misinformation. The only use of
these devices is to turn an
illegal weapon into an illegal
weapon into an illegal weapon
with is that, is that the case?
Mr. Sullivan from the Attorney
General's office.
Mr. sorry. I'm the director of
the Governor's Organized Crime
Commission.
So
It's probably, I wouldn't say
into an illegal weapon. It's to
turn it into an automatic
weapon.
at that point of Mr. Chairman
would become illegal. Am I
incorrect?
That's why we have the, sorry,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Brantley.
So only, there is technically a
process to lawfully obtain.
Something that could make it an
automatic weapon, which is why
we don't, we're not saying it
that way. We're saying if as
long as it's lawfully obtained,
but it's, it's, it's inaccurate
to say it's an illegal weapon.
It's turning it into an
automatic weapon, which is
illegal.
If not lawfully obtained.
Thank you.
Could you clarify perhaps before
you leave.
Mr. Chairman
Bucks, which is uh Glock
switches are illegal federally.
But not in the state.
Why, why would we need this law
in New Mexico.
How does this benefit to make
sure that state law matches
federal law here in the state.
Um, we were approached by law
enforcement because they are
finding large quantities of
these block switches or
converters, whatever we want to
make sure that state law matches
federal law here in the state.
Um, we were approached by law
enforcement because they are
finding large quantities of
these block switches or
converters, whatever we wanna
call them, and they did not have
the ability to charge because
under federal law, most of them
did not have the legal authority
to charge under federal law. So
they asked that we develop a
state law that they could
utilize to help um stop the use.
And sail and transportation of
these kinds of lethal devices,
um, Mr. Chair and um senator.
So the state police officer
finds me guilty of a federal
law. There's no way I can be
charged.
Mr. Chair, that is correct
unless they're a task force
officer under federal law. So
if, if it's a state officer
who's CFO with the FBI, let's
say, they could bring a charge
in federal court, but outside of
that, unless the US Attorney's
office is going to prosecute it,
but a federal officer, the
affiant or whatever, uh, that's
correct. You could not charge
it.
OK. Thank you.
Under this law,
Does it make
illegal bump stocks.
Mr. Chair, Senator Branley, no,
it does not. The Supreme Court
already found that this
definition doesn't apply to bump
stocks. This is a very narrowly
intentionally narrowly
constructed, you just apply to
block switches and auto sears.
Thank you. And can you think of
any other device that may exist
in which this would apply to
other than that clock switch.
Is there any known device out
there which could fall under
this.
Mr. Chair, Senator Bradley,
there's an autoserre, which are
not as common, and the glock
switch and that is it. We worked
really closely with other gun
lobbying groups, in fact, to try
and make sure it was just for
those, it's nothing.
Thank you. And, and I'll, I'll
say this is responsible gun
owners. I think for a long time
we've been hesitant to come to
the table, and that's wrong. And
so on something like this, that
is very specific that the
intended purpose of this device
is to be added to a weapon that
would cause great bodily harm,
and not only that, but it would
be illegal is something that is
responsible gun owners. This is
the kind of stuff where we meet
in the middle and say this, this
is wrong, and this is dangerous,
and this is the kind of stuff
that we need to.
employer or law enforcement
officer to, to take off the
street.
Um, I, I will echo a little bit
of what the chairman said at the
beginning of this is that
There's some criticism on this
entire package.
And also what Senator O'Malley
said is it gets confusing when
you have just a, a large, just a
large omnibus group of bills,
right? I do think that this was
vetted pretty properly in the
house, um, but the
disappointment out there is that
it doesn't go far enough.
I, I wouldn't vote no to bills
that are a step in the right
direction, but I would encourage
this.
Committee, I would encourage
your committee representative
that, that this is just the
appetizer, I hope, of a public
safety session and that behind
it, we will also debate and
consider meaty bills that will
make drastic meaningful change
in New Mexico. But, but I will
say that that for the, the time
that you've put into this and
the difference that this could
make, this is certainly a step
in the right direction. Uh, I
look forward to voting for this
and several others that will
come behind it that will make a
difference for.
New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. I note, I
think you've got a bill to
impose the death penalty for
fentanyl. So, so, uh, yeah, so,
uh, I, there might be some place
in the middle between the death
penalty and the, and, and this
bill uh for a reasonable
response to public safety and
crime. We're we're on a Du pass
motion as amended.
Is there any objection to the Du
pass motion.
Senator Maestus.
Explain to explain this vote,
all others showing, showing
voting in the firmesten my,
uh, you have an opportunity to
explain your vote, and that'll
conclude our work for the night.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The the
war on drugs did not work in the
90s. It's not gonna work now.
Uh
Everyone pretty much agrees it
was a fail.
Public policy and when the
penalty is 9 years, and the
average sentence is 2.
It makes no sense to bump it to
14.
A subsequent, uh, trafficking is
18 years mandatory, which trumps
the four years mandatory in
Colorado.
Secondly, uh,
There was a bill where if you
blew a 0.08.
then the government could not
get a warrant that this doesn't.
This doesn't have that, so.
Uh, and
And
we'll have the Supreme Court
decide what powder is someday.
But I do uh
I may move toward a toward a
voting for it on the floor
because the competency is so
important.
Um
But I can't go back to the 90s,
man. Thank you. Thank you.
Before we're done, I just uh we
have a number of new members, I
know we had an interim Megan,
thank you very much, uh Mr.
Baker, Representative Chandler,
for the newer, for the new
members who were not here in the
interim, I think we heard
statistically competency cases
constitute about 4% of the cases
uh that are in the judiciary
system, even if it were that
numbers wildly on on
underestimated. We're still
dealing with far less than 10%
of the cases that we're dealing
with and so it's the right step.
We got
