pretrial detention and Senator
Worth was really one of the uh
sponsors of the constitutional
amendment back in 2016, I think,
uh, along with, I think, Senator
Maestas on um changing some of
the constitutional language as
it relates to pre-trial
detention.
Uh, over the last probably
couple of years, the issue of
pretrial detention has come up
in the press incessantly. Thank
you very much. Um, the, uh,
press, the media, print media,
television.
Uh, executive branch, governor's
office, the Attorney general
have all, uh, including a lot of
local officials, uh, city and
counties have been enlisted
local law enforcement have all
been enlisted to push for some
reform to pretrial detention, or
what's described as pretrial
detention. The
The premise of those arguments
has been that certain crimes are
of such severity that
individuals should be detained
on the basis of the crime for
which they're charged, and um
the attorney General who I have
a good relationship and respect
for uh Torres was at the time
District attorney in Berlin
County and again pressed for the
same idea that that certain
crimes were so um so egregious
in the charge that that the
individual should be.
charged on that basis. And the,
the argument is sometimes made
that
The federal government does
that, and we should do things
the way the federal government
does, perhaps, so.
Are candidly for the last couple
of years, I've generally
resisted all of those uh
pressures.
And oftentimes done so in this
committee.
By our schedule. Thank you,
Madam President. We're just kind
of getting a little history of
pretrial detention leading to
our presentation. I'll, I'll,
I'll take responsibility and
I've been assigned the
responsibility over the last
several years from the governor
and from the press and the media
of being the obstacle to
pretrial detention.
I, I would argue the obstacle to
pretrial detentions the
Constitution. Um, and we heard
the uh Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court speak to us
recently, who I think he pretty
much said the same thing in a,
in a, in a very judicial
judicial way a justice cannot
prejudge issues rightfully did
not, but if you, if you wanted
to get a sense of what the
Supreme Court sees the concept
of pretrial detention as it's
been proposed, you ought to go
back and listen to his comments
and read between the lines.
Um, but that being said, that's
my perspective on things and, in
fairness, um, after the special
session and before there was a
great deal of town halls and
public discussion about why the
legislature won't pass pretrial
detention in the suggestion is
that maybe some of us on this
committee love having crime
rampant in our state, rampant in
our cities and our blind to all
of that, and I want to assure
everybody by the presentation
today that I'm certainly not
blind to it and have been one of
the
I think harshest critics of
crime in Albuquerque over the
last several years, but let's
talk about it. Let's talk about
pretrial detention. What it is,
how it works now, how it's
changed since the 20016
constitutional amendment and
I'm, I'm hoping we'll be joined
shortly by Senator Worth again,
who was really, uh, very much
involved with the issue at the
time in 2016, along with Senator
Maestas and let's see what we've
learned. Let's see where we're
at today. So I put together a
good panel just for the
committee's purpose as well too,
and those in the audience.
Um, I, uh, as a lawyer,
Uh, you know, there's, there's
some.
Some things that happened to
you.
Some people may have lots to say
about those of us that become
lawyers. Uh, but one thing that,
that, um, informs me in this
role is as a lawyer, we're
always used to hearing one side
of the argument and then hearing
the other side of the argument
and getting to be the judge by
hearing both sides and letting
the two sides to hear one
another and kind of work across
each other. It's usually you're
gonna find when I chair the
interim committee, I do that. I
usually put two opposite sides
of an argument on the same
panel, and that, in my
experience in the past has not
been very common.
Uh, maybe people don't like the
confrontation or don't wanna do
that, but I, I think it does a
couple of things I think it
keeps everybody honest, number
one, and not get too far with
rhetoric without knowing their,
the person with the other
perspective is gonna be
listening there and maybe, maybe
giving a different perspective,
but more important than that, it
gives them a chance to hear
themselves, uh, in each other,
right? So I'm hoping that each,
in this case, we're hearing each
other too, so, so we're
represented, I think, by the
right people today, which is we
have representatives from the
courts, offices.
reports. We have a
representative from the district
attorneys and the way of
representative of the criminal
defense lawyers and we don't do
this very often, right? Let's
have the key players sitting at
the table telling us how this
works and how it should work or
it shouldn't work. So we're
going to spend about an hour
before we get to our bills today
talking about pretrial
detention. I'm gonna ask to
start with the Carl, uh, and a
little bit of history. I'm gonna
ask you to keep your time to 15
minutes and I'm gonna ask the
others to do the same and uh and
then we do have.
Um
some discussion among the
committee to talk a little bit
about, about this subject, so.
Mr.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. I'm Carl Rese, director of
the administrative Office of the
courts with me is Mr. Gilbert
Jaramillo, the senior statewide
program manager who, who does
actually.
The actual hard work of running
our pretrial services across the
state.
Um, we do have this little
handout that I think everyone
has, it's this one.
Uh, as well as our pre-trial
annual report.
clarify something too.
I mean Emily's job really,
really hard. Many times people
come to the committee with
handouts, um, and, and I've told
her don't just automatically
hand out the handouts.
Reason for that is that
sometimes the handouts are full
of text and lots of information
and members are, are conflicted
between trying to listen to the
presentation and read, uh, an
encyclopedia, which everybody
seems to give us these days, and
then we can't do both. Um, so,
I'll, I'll look at the handouts
and I'll make a judgment whether
it's something I wanna, I think
the members want to be reading
or listening to. So in this
case, I think the the handout
that we're talking about here is
like a PowerPoint presentation.
And so yeah, we're gonna go
ahead and hand that out then
too.
I just want you all to know and
the committee members know why
sometimes you're not getting the
handouts until the end of the
presentation. Um, this is not to
be critical of anyone at all,
but, um, you know, if you get,
this is the this is the AOC's
materials, right? And that's
yeah, that's just. I get it and,
and if you're giving this out,
members are trying to read this
and go through this while the
presentation is going on, it's
impossible, right? So I'm trying
to make a judgment, but if, if
you need a presentation for your
presentation, please just let me
know, OK? Otherwise, I'm
sending people with the material
home at the end of the day.
And they'll make good use of it,
I'm sure.
Mr. Chair members, thank you,
uh, for having us, um.
Our pre-child program is really
guided by a quote from the US
Supreme Court in a case called
US versus Salerno, is in our
society, liberty is the norm and
detention prior to trial or
without trial is the carefully
limited exception.
Um, of course, all defendants in
criminal actions are entitled to
a presumption of innocence under
our federal and state
constitutions.
And so our pretrial program.
Really takes a public safety
approach.
Um, to pretrial, we want to
maximize that public safety,
maximize the court appearance.
And to do this, we, we use uh
sort of the risk principle to
categorize folks and um suggest
to judges, and it's their
decision.
Um
The least restrictive
conditions, uh, available to
ensure that court appearance and
public safety. Mr. Jamillo is
going to talk a little bit about
the status of our program, and
then I'll come back, Mr. Chair,
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Um, so the, the conversation of
pretrial detention is extremely
important, but it is just one
piece to the entire pretrial
justice puzzle.
Therefore, we kind of wanted to
talk about the initiative as a
whole, um, what's kind of
occurring currently in the
state. So we have, um, currently
implemented pretrial services
programs and provided tools in 7
judicial districts currently.
That includes 16 district courts
and 24 magistrate courts around
the state, we are actively
working with 4 additional
judicial districts, um, to
include 12 counties.
Who will have access to pretrial
service programs, as well as all
the tools that I'm going to
discuss here um shortly, um,
those will be available to those
for judicial districts within
the next 3 to 6 months.
Um
The 5th judicial district will
be the only remaining district,
um, without pretrial services,
and we hope to begin that
implementation, um, late spring
or early summer of 2025, to
round out the full
implementation in the state of
New Mexico.
So a little about the pretrial
justice program structure.
Um, so we start with the
responsibilities of us at AOC.
We currently have centralized
units that provide information
to judges around the state, um.
They provide different tools to
assist judges in making these
determinations. These tools are
also available to district
attorneys and defense counsel
throughout the state to assist
in that decision making.
Um, we assist with technical
assistance, um, really trying to
support sustainability of our
pre-trial programs throughout
the state. And then also
evaluation, we want to continue
to evaluate these programs and
ensure that they are effective,
and they are consistent with
that public safety model that
Carl referred to. That is our
top priority in the state is how
do we maximize public safety in
New Mexico and all of our
communities in New Mexico.
Um, second to that, we convened
local pretrial stakeholder
groups in all of these
jurisdictions, and that includes
stakeholders that are involved
with the criminal justice system
and the pretrial justice system
to include the district
attorney's Law Office of the
Public Defenders, we do have um
providers in the community that
uh we invite to these victims'
advocates, along with AOC and
local really to examine um
To start, they look at how do we
implement, why are we
implementing this secondary to
that is once we do implement,
they become oversight
committees.
And we review on a regular basis
what is working, what's not
working, what adjustments can we
make? We review data on a
regular basis to continue to
improve the system.
And then we also have that local
pretrial programs, and those are
staffed by the courts. We have
individuals in the courts who
are providing that supervision
at a local level.
Um, they are informing the
judges of violations that occur
in the community, they're
informing judges of uh any
individuals who are on pretrial
release, who may be re-arrested.
Um, so those are just some of
the services they provide, and
I'll get into a little bit more
of the specifics of what that
looks like.
So some of the role of that
pretrial service agency, um.
We do risk assessment.
Uh, we manage that risk.
We also look to service
integration, so we know
behavioral health is a huge
topic currently, um, it is
really at the forefront of a lot
of the discussions that are
occurring statewide, and
pre-trial does have a role in
that to voluntarily connect
individuals to services at that
pretrial phase of a case.
And then last is the performance
measurement, and as I mentioned
before that, looking at the
data, what is working, providing
feedback to all these
jurisdictions and making
improvements as necessary.
So the risk assessment, we do
have a centralized unit, um,
within the AOC they are housed
in Albuquerque. It consists of
um 25 employees. These are
employees that are working 22
hours a day, 7 days a week.
Anytime anyone is booked into a
detention center in one of our
active sites, they initiate the
case in our case management
system, they run a
Comprehensive background
investigation for that
individual. They have access to
the national database as well as
all the court databases.
And they conduct what's called a
public safety assessment. That
information has been made
available to the judge, prior to
that initial hearing.
Again, these are tools to assist
the judge in making that initial
um decision regarding conditions
or release, so on and so forth.
Um, the public safety
assessment, um,
That is the risk assessment that
is currently being utilized by
the administrative Office of the
courts, that has been
revalidated in Bernao County.
Um, it was initially validated
in 2021. It was validated again,
um.
This past summer,
And it is
proven to be predictive of the
potential for individuals to,
I'm sorry, it's predictive of
the likelihood of an individual
recommitting a crime during the
pretrial phase, or failing to
appear in court.
So it is a really important
tool, um, for our judges to
consider.
But it is just that, it is one
tool, one piece of that puzzle
for judges to consider as part
of that initial decision.
So the risk management that
comes with the supervision, um.
As I mentioned, we do have local
pretrial service programs in all
of these jurisdictions, so that,
that is uh.
typically a program manager or
supervisor, as well as pre-trial
officers who are responsible for
supervising individuals who are
ordered supervision in the
community.
Um
In fiscal year 24, they actively
supervised over 7, 7300
defendants, um.
Part of that responsibility is
notifying defendants of upcoming
court hearings, if there are any
noncompliance issues in the
community. They are responsible
for notifying not just the
judge, but also the district
attorney and defense counsel in
every single instance where
there is a potential violation
of the judge's orders. So
anytime that occurs, the report
goes out to the.
Court and to the parties.
They also provide
recommendations to the court.
And sometimes those
recommendations could include uh
pretrial services.
Uh, does not believe that they
can provide supervision to
support public safety, and again
it, it's the responsibility of
the parties and the.
You know, the judge discretion
ultimately to make that
decision.
Um, we have our 2nd.
AOC centralized unit, which is
our electronic monitoring unit,
and that consists of 16 current
employees.
Um, that unit also works nights,
weekends and holidays, and
they're responsible for
supervising those individuals
that are ordered to GPS tracking
in the community.
So on average, they supervise
over 215 defendants on any given
night. The service integration,
as I mentioned, um, a lot of our
local programs have made great
connections with local service
providers in their communities,
um,
They try to identify the needs
of these individuals who are
ordered to pre-trial supervision
and connect him to appropriate
services.
We, uh, have done a lot of work
uh more recently in pretrial
diversion.
And how can we implement
pretrial diversion programs in
the state of New Mexico, so we
have identified some pilot um
sites in New Mexico.
to potentially, you know, pilot
these pretrial diversion
programs as well as potentially
having navigator type positions.
Um, that can assist defendants
in navigating through the court
system as well as addressing any
needs um in the community. And
then again, last is that
performance measurement. So at
AOC we worked um extensively
over the past 4 years to build
our data infrastructure, we can
say a lot more today than we
were able to say just 5 years
ago.
Um, regarding the pre-trial
population, what those outcomes
are, what those performance
measures are saying, on what's
working, what's not working, and
how can we continue to adjust to
again improve that public
safety.
Um, so we are currently working
in the New Mexico data exchange.
We have several data sets
available, um.
We are have ongoing efforts to
expand, um.
Our reporting, such as a public
facing data dashboard that we
hope to roll out soon, uh, for
transparency and to make all
that data available to you, to
the communities, so that they're
aware of what is occurring with
the pretrial population and how
successful they are.
And then we continue to uh
contract with third party
researchers such as UNM, uh,
it's, um, Santa Fe Institute
also to validate certain tools
that we're using, and also to
assist us in determining what's
working and what's not working
in New Mexico.
What we are seeing, um, so far
is our model is improving public
safety in New Mexico, in every
single jurisdiction in the state
that we've implemented this
model, public safety has
improved.
So
Um, on slight 11, if you have
that.
We did a pre and
post-implementation look at
public safety in in all the
communities.
And again, as I mentioned,
public safety improved across
the board in every single one of
these jurisdictions. If you take
the 3rd judicial district, for
example.
Prior to this implementation,
approximately 24% of defendants.
We're being re-arrested for new
crimes, pretrial, that went down
to 18% after we implemented this
model in the 3rd judicial
district.
And the next slide is, is very
similar, but this is more
specifically looking at those,
um.
Charters that we're most
concerned about, which we would
consider new violent charges in
the community. And as you could
see, um, consistent with the
last chart, public safety has
increased in every single
jurisdiction in the state with
regard to violent offenses.
I know we're gonna talk a lot
today about pretrial detention.
Um
The data on slide 13 is for
fiscal year 24, there were
approximately 2,459 preventive
detention motions filed in the
state of New Mexico.
There were almost 1300
defendants who were held in
custody pretrial.
Uh, pending their trial.
So that's nearly 1300
individuals who did remain
incarcerated, um.
Pending the outcome of their
their current charge.
So that is under the current
state statute.
Mr. Chair, uh.
We'll, we'll get you a better.
Copy the the printer, uh, goofed
on us on that one.
It looked
It is. Yes. So 1 through 13th at
the bottom, first at the top,
13th at the bottom, and then a
total.
Um, I imagine, um,
In in in some of our one on one
conversations we've talked about
uh.
What we call, what we call
colloquially colloquially. Rule
403.
Um
Which was a rule adopted to make
sure that we're carrying out.
Um, a bill that you all passed.
And
Uh
It really sets out the.
Requirements for judges, if
someone is if a defendant is
charged with the crime and
released pretrial, and then
picks up a new crime, it really
sets out, um, all the things
that have to happen. So first,
as the.
Um, Billy all passed it's now a
statute, um.
As it says that person has to be
held until each each judge that
Has them on release can take a
look at it. The Supreme Court
rule actually requires a
hearing, so that the judge,
prosecutor and defense attorney
can really, as I said, uh,
before the hearing, have eyes on
that defendant and really
understand what's going on, it
gives a defense and prosecution
a chance to make those those
arguments, um.
That rule came into effect just
in May 2024, and we've had over
2750 defendants, um, have that
temporary hold and then that
that'll let the judge decide,
well, do we need to increase the
conditions? Do we need to revoke
the conditions, um, you know,
really what's going on there.
Um, and it's really that
background investigation unit
that uh Mr. Jamio talked about
that plays a crucial role here
because they're the ones who are
figuring out, all right, this
person's coming in with another
charge. They have a pending case
over in this other jurisdiction,
it could be a different part of
the state.
Um, and so those judges might
not necessarily know, but
they're the ones providing that
information and connecting those
dots and making sure those
hearings are held. Uh, the
Supreme Court also went further
than the language of the statute
by saying if pretrial files a
notice of a substantial
violation, the judge also has to
hold a hearing, even if it's
just on the first charge, the
person hasn't picked up a new
charge, and so that's another
public safety focused uh feature
of that rule.
Uh, finally, Mr. Chair, I just
want a brief note on uh some of
our funding, as Mr. Harmione
noted, we're not yet in every
part of the state, um, those
expansions are funded by one
time appropriation, and so, of
course, we're hoping for
recurring general fund this year
are electronic monitoring unit
has operated since the fall of
2019 excuse me, 2021.
And uh it's been uh kind of sho
shoesttrung together here on.
Various bits of one time
appropriations and so I was
presenting the House
Appropriations uh Saturday and
making a pitch for recurring
general fund, uh, you know, if,
if the legislature feels that
that's a good program, I think
we should uh have that recurring
funding there, especially
because they're the ones
operating nights and weekends
and holidays, it's already very
challenging to recruit those
folks, and so without permanent
funding, it gets even, even more
challenging. Uh, with that, Mr.
Chair, uh, we'll stand for
questions or I don't know if the
If you prefer to move on to the
we'll we'll go to the full panel
and then we'll take questions to
all of you, so they'll be a
little more efficient. So who's
next up? We've got the district
attorneys next, I think.
That.
Oh
available
Thanks for doing that.
Talking about pretrial attention
just got.
Oh,
and, and help, help, help some
of the newer members 9th
District. You're the, you're the
district attorney in the 9th
district and tell us what that
means.
Uh, so that's Carry Roosevelt
County. That's for Clovis.
A learning over those two
counties.
That's my job.
So thinking about this trying to
give you guys a good
perspective.
break out.
5409
rules
It's by
convincing evidence that is
likely to pose a threat to the
safety of others.
At least
That's a pretty big question. If
I ask everybody in this room,
I've done this with judges, um,
this trafficking meth.
Some people will say, well,
that's not.
Other people are like,
yes.
is
the island.
That's very good.
So
That's kind of catchy.
What does it mean to be dangers
and various opinions can exist
and not be wrong, just different
opinions.
The next question is, the next
thing we have to show is that no
conditions of release will
reasonably protect the safety of
any person or the community.
That's kind of a weird question
because we're saying, hey, we
invented all these laws and said
don't break these laws. We're
like, hey, this guy violated the
law. He's a problem cause
violated the law
and we're now we're having to
prove that this guy
If you follow whatever the judge
tells you.
Somehow, you know, double secret
probation is now gonna have the
first
law, you know, so that's a hard
concept. what does that mean?
So good family this is thought I
would, would do this and tell
you three different stories.
So, Mr. West.
Very bad guy.
He was molesting his father and
stepdaughter.
11 to 17.
She turns 18, 1 of her brothers
finds a phone all over these
pictures of it happening.
police gets involved and talk to
Oh, I'm sorry. Uh, I think he is
dangerous. He's, you know, going
into these places at night with
crowbars, every time the police
have contact, he's throwing
stuff at them, he's ran. Uh, I'm
gonna hold that person in
pretrial attention.
Here's a 3rd story.
Uh, please see a guy, uh, he has
a warrant, so they're trying to
arrest him. Well, in the
process, he's
Takes a shopping cart and throws
it at a police officer and takes
off running. They catch him,
they find weapons on him. So
they run his background, so he's
got a felon in possession, uh,
is one of the charges and
battery on the peace officer for
pushing the, the card at it. Uh,
prosecutor gets that case, we
file pretrial detention, he
looks at it and says.
I mean, is this really violent
and dangerous. If you look at
the video.
You know, he's not, like, trying
to beat the cop up with it. He's
trying to get away from the cop.
I'm gonna withdraw that motion
for pretrial detention.
Cause I, you know, I just don't
know if that really fits.
A month later, this man is now
charged with murder, um, because
he was out on jail, out on bond,
and is now committed a murder.
I say all that to say, it's all
a learning curve. Um, I think
the reason that we're having
better success with the
pre-trial detention program in
the 9th and in the smaller
communities, is because you
learn from your mistakes, and
then a smaller community, you
see that judges have to live
with those mistakes, they have
to see that, hey.
We let this guy out. District
attorney's offices. I have to
see that, hey, we.
All that pretrial detention
motion.
And maybe we should have fought
harder. Um, we have to live with
that consequences. So,
This is a uh.
A new process for the courts,
and it's something that as we
continue to develop it, we're
just getting more and more
guidance.
It's not a perfect system by any
means, but I do think time will
continue to help grow and
improve this, the the Supreme
Court has issued decisions
trying to say, hey, you can
consider a lot of stuff, um, you
know, to determine
dangerousness. Uh, we can do
proffers. These aren't meant to
take, you know, a, a woman who's
been raped come back now come
back to court 9 days later and
testify about it, um.
You know, there's, we can let
them proffer, hey, this is the
evidence we have, um, so I think
we're getting there. We're
getting better. The courts are
starting to realize.
You know, some people need to be
locked up and
I think the biggest pushback we
get is, I think a lot of the
judges around the state
initially felt, our hands are
tied, we have to release them,
we have to release them.
Um, and I think experience is
gonna just keep making it
better, uh, and it's
unfortunately, people will get
hurt in that process, um, but I
don't know a better way. Um, so
I say all that to say that while
I wouldn't mind if we
Continue to make improvements on
pre-trial detention.
Overall, it's working in the
night, and I think it's a large
part because we have judges who
really care about the community,
and they've got to get elected
too, or, you know, they've got
to be retained and so for them,
you know,
The Judge doesn't want to say,
hey, we let out this guy who
burglarized 7 places and was
caught in Texas, and, you know,
the lady almost got shot by the
city councilwoman because he was
breaking in with the crowbar.
Um, you know, I, I think that,
that helps too, a little bit of
the political pressure of it to
say,
You know, it's OK to hold them
in. I think that's.
That's the overall message I'm
gonna continue to try to push
the judges.
It's OK to hold people in
pretrial detention. If they're
dangerous, that's where they
need to be.
So that's, that's kind of my
little, my little bit, and then
I'll stand for questions at the
end, but I will turn it over to
good afternoon.
Senator, Chair, um, committee,
um, for those of you who don't
know me, my name is Jonathan
Ibarra. I am a, uh,
Public defender. I am also
currently the president of the
New Mexico Criminal Defense
Lawyers Association, um, and I'm
a former prosecutor and judge.
Um, and so I think it's
I have a story too, of a story
about a guy who was detained
last year for a.
Uh, an allegation that he had uh
beat up his mother, um, or
unrelated reasons. His mother
later.
Uh, died.
And um he was still being held
in jail, um, even though on a
case that didn't look like the
state was going to be able to
prove, and he just died this
weekend in jail, um.
Well, at the hospital because
they took him to the jail.
Um
There's a real human effect on
people who are being detained
just as much as there is on the
people who are being released.
And, and so I think that that's
something that
Doesn't get talked about enough.
And that isn't.
You know, it isn't, you know,
it's a quick
12th blurb on the news, um, on
that case. And now,
By tomorrow nobody will remember
that name.
And it'll just be.
Another person in MDC who died.
And, and I think.
When we're talking about
pretrial detention.
I live in the community, right?
I, I, I live in the state and in
and in Bernao County and I want
my community to be safe. I want
people who should be in jail in
jail, and people who shouldn't
be in jail, not in jail, and
And it's easy to talk over and
over again about the things
where the cases where things
went wrong because somebody got
let out of jail, and it's one of
the.1% of people who do
something really bad, um, when
they're released, um, on
conditions of release because I
think pre trial does a really
good job of trying its best to
to supervise people, and things
are going to happen. But what
doesn't get talked about a lot
is
The half of the people that they
do that they file for detention
on where they want. And the fact
that the vast majority of those
people would not have committed
new crimes based on the data.
And so, I think
That matters. And, and I think
that my
Fundamental problem with the way
that pretrial detention keeps
coming back um to this
legislature, to this committee,
um, is the fact that
It's, it's just not as simple as
we need to jail our way out of
things and because that's not
what we should be doing and I
think this committee has done a
very good job of being very
critical of bills that make us
look like we're just trying to
jail our way out of things when
that's a, it doesn't work, um,
and B, it's like we're not
solving problems by doing that.
I think
You know, I
Because I don't have enough to
do, I keep track of every single
detention case that's been filed
in Berlio County since they
started, like every single one I
have on my list that's right
here. And, and a couple of
months, it's gonna pass 10,000
cases that they filed for
detention in Bernallio County.
And, and so I have all sorts of
data that I'm happy to give to
you all about what about grant
rates, about what that means as
far as how, how many people
with, uh, that are considered
low risk under the, the public
safety assessment, um, that, you
know, AOC was talking about
things like that. In fact, we
were just discussing right
before we started wondering
about people um who were the
lowest risk, um, on, on that.
Uh, assessment tool and so I
looked just while we were here,
I was able to do that because
like, I have the technology. Um,
and
About just under.
10% of the cases where the state
filed for pretrial detention,
um, we were for people who were
considered to be the lowest risk
on the public safety assessment.
And a lot of those cases,
there's a really good reason why
they filed, right? They, um,
The rape charges, their murder
charges, their possession of
child porn cases, electronic
solicitation, because a lot of
those cases, those people don't
have prior criminal history
before they get arrested on
these charges. So completely
reasonable why they filed on a
lot of those charges. But
there's also for possession
cases. And there's 5 receiving
transferring the possession of a
stolen car cases out of those
and
And, you know, not surprisingly,
because it should be really hard
on a person who doesn't have any
history, um, which is why
they're the lowest risk, uh,
that the vast majority of those
people are not detained. Um, but
about a quarter of them are.
Um, and that's because they're,
they should be, you know, you're
looking at those charges, and
they should be detained, and
they are being detained. And so,
So I think judges
are trying and have always
tried, um, to be very
Critical of what they're looking
at, um, you know, that it was a
long time ago when I was a
judge, and I always thought
sentencing was the hardest
decision. There may still be,
but, but the decision on
pre-child detention is like,
Next
Um, because you have so little
information, you're doing it so
early, and that's how it should
be because you don't want people
sitting in jail, um, for weeks
waiting to see if they're going
to get released, because we know
from the LFC from, from other
data that every single day a
person is in jail. They are more
likely to commit a crime in the
future.
And, and so we want people out
if we, if they just should be
out because we don't want to
take their jobs, their homes,
their kids, because they're
stuck in jail when they
shouldn't be in jail. And, and
that's again, part of that real
human cost that we don't look at
on the other side because it's
people who are accused, not
necessarily convicted of
committing a crime.
You know, the, um, stats as far
as disposition of cases hasn't
significantly changed much over
the last few years. Still, as of
my stats that I just did at the
end of the year. Um, so for
cases that are at least a year
old, um, where they filed for
detention. So starting or from
December 31st of 23, going back
to January of 17.
44% of the cases in Berlio
County where they filed for
detention, there is no state
conviction.
00 state conviction. That
doesn't get to the cases where
they pled to misdemeanors,
mostly in order to get out of
jail. That doesn't get to the
people who got probation. This
is just no conviction.
And that hasn't significantly
changed over the last few years.
And I think that matters, right?
And those numbers are lower on
cases where detention was
granted. Some of that's because
they're more serious cases a lot
of the time. Some of that's
because the proof was probably
better, which is part of why
they got held. Um, but it's
still, I can, I can tell you
exactly the number.
Um
35%.
Of cases where detention was
granted in Berlio County.
There's 3,882 motions going back
um from December of 23, and
1,358 of those. No conviction.
In the state courts.
I think that's meaningful. And I
think that's something that gets
ignored by the media. I don't
think it gets ignored by this
committee because I think this
committee is very diligent in
what it looks at, but
But I think that matters, and I
think that's part of the ugly. I
think that's, that's part of
what's going on. So,
As far as
The statute that was passed, um,
last year, Senate Bill 271, um,
and how that's been impact, you
know, impacts things, um, right
after that statute passed, the
court had rules, uh, that came
out for comments. Um, they
listened to some of those
comments, including from me. Um,
and the, the bills, you know,
the, the rules that they talked
about came into place.
And
I don't, I think that probably
there are more people being
held. There are certainly more
people being held initially, um,
there are functional problems
with the way it's working. Um,
there are people who are being
held longer than they probably
need to be because of the way
that takes time, um, you know,
metro court, so at least in
Bernaino County, uh, Metro court
is delayed on getting people
seen for their first appearance,
which sets behind the detention
hearing, which sits behind
everything else.
Um, and at
I know that the jail has
specifically talked, um, in the
Bernao County Coordinating
Council, um, about
People
But the jail population of
people who are there more like 7
days as opposed to more like 3
days, um, has increased
substantially. And so, you know,
there's still people who are
going to get out because what
they were arrested for, they, we
can put them on conditions. Um,
but they're staying in jail
longer and more likely to lose
jobs and homes and kids.
And so, so there are things that
we can fix. I think money would
help, um, I think money for AOC,
I think money for um, for the
courts to uh to deal with those,
I think money for the
prosecutors and especially,
frankly for the public defenders
since we're less fungible, um,
to be able to handle those
hearings more quickly, more
efficiently. Um, but more
importantly, money for
resources.
To send people to, um, and
that's, that's something that,
you know, I know, you know,
crime bills come up every year
and I know you are all, are you
all are under a great deal of
pressure to do something about
the crime problem, but it
doesn't do any good if we don't
have
Ways to help people, because
then the only way we can quote
unquote help people is to throw
them away in jail and then
They can be killed like this
person was in MDC.
So, um, so that's, I think.
Bad and the ugly. Great. Thank
you very much. All right. We've
been joined by the full
committee now, which is good,
and also joined by former Chief
Justice Ken Bacon in the back of
the room uh for the Supreme
Court, we welcome you and we
try, we try to come in here
under the cover, but I think
it's, I think it's great you're
here. I, I did, uh, call the
current Chief Justice earlier
today and left him a message
inviting him to listen in or or
uh join us. I think that's a
good thing. I think it's good
for the dialogue.
Across all the branches of
government, and I did for those
of you that are joining us, I
didn't make an observation that
when the chief, current Chief
Justice, spoke to the judiciary.
He had some words with thoughts
on the notion of pretrial
detention and he, he did the
right thing. He didn't prejudge
and, and wouldn't prejudge and I
know Justice Bacon in the back
would not prejudge any laws that
we pass because that's, that's
uh.
Uh, their way of doing things.
They they will wait for the time
and place when they have to make
decisions and, and at the same
time I, I think I can read
between the lines, uh, when it
comes to some of these, these
issues and what the court.
would probably consider to be
constitutional, constitutional
lanes that we have to travel
within. So, um, thank you for
the presentation. I think it's
gonna be an interesting dialogue
and discussion. So I'm looking
for members who wish to be
recognized. We still probably
give ourselves an hour if, um,
there's a need for a discussion
on the topic and then still get
our work done at the end of the
day. So many members wishing to
be recognized, anyone at all?
Bradley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you gentlemen, for being here
today. I want to begin by
announcing that I'm not a
lawyer. I have no expertise in
the criminal justice system. I
don't understand the courts.
Um, but I recognize.
But it's broken.
And the reality is I probably
represent the mass majority of
New Mexicans who don't
understand the details of this
problem, but are sick and tired
of the skyrocketing crime across
New Mexico and want this fixed.
Sooner than later.
In trying to better understand
the problems with bail reform.
It seems like the 2026
constitutional amendment was
pretty well intended.
If I read here, it, it was
intended to do two things,
prevent the release of dangerous
criminals that could get out on
bail cause they could afford it.
And prevent the detainment.
Of nonviolent offenders who just
couldn't afford bail.
And so when that went out on on
the ballot.
Who would disagree with that? In
fact, most didn't.
91% of the legislator voted in
favor 87% of New Mexico voters,
including myself, because what
we thought we were getting was,
was a tool that would allow
judges to better protect
communities.
And the reality is, is that
maybe it's lost in the
interpretation or the language
of the actual amendment that
went on the ballot, but that's
certainly not what New Mexicans
got.
You know, and I have some
questions in order.
Sir, sir, I think you, you
struck it the most in order to
obtain an order to deny the
pretrial release, prosecutors
must file a a detention request
in district court and prove
clear and convincing evidence
that no release conditions will
be reasonably protected the
safety. That seems like
impossible standards.
To reach that burden of proof,
and so, so I've looked to you to
say, is it, is it in the
language?
Of what went out, is that why
this is, this is not keeping
Mexicans safe and.
Uh, I'd like you both to speak
to that to to to that statement,
is that what is preventing
judges, and I guess I would say
this.
Our judges only denying bail to
persons charged with a felony.
Based on this.
Yes or no? Can they only deny
bail to someone with a felony
charge.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantley,
yes, that is the text of the
Constitution.
OK.
Ken, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Can bail be denied to a person
who has previously failed to
appear because of a flight risk,
and we know they're not rushing
off with, you know, a million
dollars and a passport to
Europe. They're just simply
flight risk, meaning they're not
going to come back to court and
bail today be denied to a person
who was previously failed to
appear.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly,
the Constitution only mentions
safety.
The prosecution and defense. I
think they'll have a little bit
to add here to can go in and
argue just about anything in
that hearing to talk about
safety.
Um and I think
The challenge is that every
Every court, every judge has a
different view on how to answer
that question. Um, and so in my
district, when I go to my
district attorney meetings with
around the state, all the
district attorneys, they're
like, well, your jurisdiction,
you're living over by Texas,
they're doing it right over
there, you're fine, oh, so I may
be a unicorn district attorney
with my judges, but we have our
magistrate judges holding people
with cash bonds, um, which
It's not really how the rules
describe it, but their theory is
this person is not coming to
court.
Um, we're gonna make them give
something to ensure they're
gonna appear in court, um, and
people find ways to get money
and they post the bond, and it
seems to help. Um, it seems to
help to have that. The hard part
is we kind of went away from a
bonding system, because we put
all the bondsmen out of
business. Um, so it used to be
people would post, you know, a
500 or 5000 cash surety bond,
and they have to go give $500 to
a bondsman who then vouch that
they'll come to court and if
they didn't, we.
could say, hey, bondsman, you
owe us the rest, and so that the
bondsman would say, well, give
me a minute, let me go chase
him, you know, dog the bounty
hunter style and let's go catch
the person and bring them back.
And so, uh, now we don't have
that now it's just a, you know,
a surety, and then if they don't
show up and um, so we'll say
it's $1000 or 10%, they have to
post $100 to get out of jail. If
they don't show up, then the
court orders them to pay $1000
but there's nobody actually
collecting that money or going
after it.
So
it didn't take long for people
to kind of realize that those
it's a bond with no teeth.
It,
it seems like when we look at
this, that, that the New Mexico
voters were really.
Really sold on something.
That was well intended, but it's
just simply.
Not
The consequences of what we
wanted, I mean that's, it's,
it's well intended, but it
certainly is cost coming at a
detriment.
to New Mexicans when it comes to
safety. I, I would say this as
we close cause I know there's a
lot of other people with a lot
of questions here is while the
language of all of this,
including the Constitutional
amendment, which I would argue
is where we've lost it all is
the language of what actually
went out on the ballot is very
complex and very complicated.
But the consequences of this are
pretty easy to understand.
Skyrocketing crime, a revolving
door that continues to let
criminals back on the street,
and the demands of New Mexicans.
Or even more clear, fix it.
Fix it. I would argue that some
people
Need to be in jail.
DUI offender, especially if you
killed someone, go to jail. If
you've beat your mom to death,
she's died as a consequence, you
arguably belong in jail.
Some people just simply need to
be in jail and the and the
mental health aspect is a
completely different avenue. But
some, some hardened criminals
need to be locked up in jail,
and the message we could send is
New Mexicans to say, if you come
here.
And you hurt citizens.
You hurt New Mexico and continue
to be part of this cesspool of
crime that we're seeing, you're
going to jail and we're gonna
support and empower our judges
to send you to jail and keep you
in jail. I would argue now that
our judges are not reflecting by
interpreting this, the values of
New Mexico society.
That, that would be my argument.
By letting these repeat
offenders, especially back on
the street, and I think that
right now the governor herself
has a wonderful opportunity to
lead this change supported by
Legislators who are saying this
was not our intent.
And if we have to go back in
there and
And amend the wording of a
constitution because it has been
most interpreted by judges who
aren't willing to do the hard
work.
Then maybe we do need to open up
the state constitution and send
a clearer message because the
intent of the legislator.
was to make New Mexico safer and
as a consequence, the exact
opposite has happened.
I don't offer any other
solutions in that, but I can
tell you that New Mexicans want
them.
Thank you, gentle one all for
your time.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, thank
you, gentlemen, very much.
Justice, thank you. Just, um,
Quick refresher course on uh
where we were.
You know, when we tried to solve
some of these problems.
And when I say back in the day,
I'm, I'm talking about
relatively recent past, but
prior to
Bill reform prior to case
management order in Burnel
County.
We're one of either the only
state or one of two states that
had more people in jail than in
prison.
Our system was broken.
In, in, in Berlio County where I
practiced as a prosecutor and
events lawyer.
A person would would bond out
cause folks are getting out,
they're just getting out the
next day.
There's not a camera when the
when the guy bonds out.
But folks are getting out the
next day.
And then a, a year later they'd
get indicted.
So they're under 0 supervision
for an entire year.
They get indicted.
And then a year after that, they
would get convicted.
And it's very weird to send
someone to prison 2 years after
the fact, you know, unless
there's obviously horrible
violence and, and harm.
So that was our system. That
was, that was, that was the
criminal justice system of Berno
County 15 years ago. Um, and it
was a horrible, horrible system
because the folks that didn't
get out.
We're in jail for months and
months and months at a time and
to do time is, believe it or
not, determined to do.
A year in prison is actually
less harmful than doing a year
in a county jail.
Cause you're just cement walls.
There's nothing to do. So a year
in a county jail is incredibly
debilitating and and that person
will never.
Uh, truly recover.
But anyway, um, so that's,
that's the system that's where
we're at.
The constitutional amendment and
the media needs to help get this
right at some point. The
constitutional amendment
doesn't, doesn't let people out.
It keeps people in.
If we were to erase the
constitutional amendment right
now, judges would be, there
would be no law that would keep
someone in jail pretrial.
It, it, it, we, it should have
been called preventative
detention, but we call it bail
reform. The legislature did not
create bail reform. The
legislature reacted to.
Uh, to bail reform that was done
by the courts in State v. Brown,
as you recall, Chairman, that
because this one
The person was in jail for like
2 years, the case was going
nowhere.
Uh, a brilliant, brilliant, uh,
Opinion by the late Justice
Charlie Daniels.
Didn't really create new law, it
just reminded us you cannot use
money to keep someone in jail.
And so, you know, what we gotta
do is convince ourselves that
money bail is a thing of the
past. It's never coming back.
It's unconstitutional, it was
unconstitutional then it's
unconstitutional now, and so we
cannot use money to hold someone
in jail.
That's our reality as
policymakers.
Um, and it actually shocks the
conscious.
To um
story, Chairman, that my
favorite Christmas movie is
Trading Places and yes, I fast
forward half the movies I don't
trip, but when they bombed out
Eddie Murphy, my son was like.
Who are those guys? Well, how
did he get? What happened? He
had to pay money to get out of
jail?
Because he was shocked at that
notion. Only the Philippines and
certain states.
You, you have to pay money to
get out of jail, the rest of the
of humanity doesn't doesn't do
that anyway, so here we are, so
State versus Brown was in
November of 2014, and there was
this like gray or this weird
gray area, the courts went into
action. They created a task
force on pretrial. I was
actually a member of that task
force as a lawyer, so in 2015,
the recommendation was the
constitutional amendment.
In the 30 day session, German
during the constitutional
amendment, we all passed it and
then it became law in December
of 2016, so that was actually
like a two-year period where it
was like, whoa, can we actually
hold these people. Uh, so
anyway, that's where we are now.
I think, um,
I think that what's weird for
me, chairman, is, is the, the
percentage that the, that the
prosecutors and the judges of
this state have not.
And have come to agree on where
that constitutional line is, and
I think that the gentleman
prosecutor explained the
complexities of all these
various factual scenarios.
But, uh, two things just strike
me as incredibly peculiar.
Uh
And I'll never quite put my arms
around it, but, but, and once
again, it's not back in the day
and in the not too recent past,
the tention hearings were
3 minutes, 2 minutes, 5 minutes.
Judges didn't care what the
prosecutor had to say, Judges
would hold people using money
cash bail, $50,000 cash only and
that decision took like 2
minutes and nobody blinked and
nobody looked back.
And so I think the prosecutor
said it best when judges felt
handcuffed, they, in my opinion,
they just intellectualize the
constitutional amendment instead
of using it as a tool to hold
people that they would have held
before using cash bail.
And I know that that folks are
critical of that opinion, but it
just seemed
Like it should not have taken
years to get to that
constitutional line I wanna.
The Supreme Court did an
excellent job of finally
pointing it out to folks. But
anyway, that's, that's kind of
my take on it.
But here's a couple of
questions, chairman. The um
The concern I have is, is, is
acknowledging reality every
single misdemeanor gets out. Is
that correct, Mr. Chairman?
Every single person accused of a
misdemeanor with no pending
cases gets out.
The next day or 23 senator, um,
the, if
If they don't have another
reason why they would be held,
um, which a lot of them do, um,
but, but if they don't have
another reason why they would be
held a person who was arrested
on a misdemeanor who has
no, at least in County and most
of the state who has no other
pending charges would be
ultimately released with some
sort of
Yeah, thank you. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Barra,
so we have to, we have to deal
with that in situation because
even though it was horribly
unjust many a times.
Drug addicts.
Would, would dry out, so to
speak, drug drug addicts would
detox.
You know, that the 11 days, 28
days, whatever someone would
stay in jail for 3 months, 6
months, 9 months, they would
detox and come out of jail.
You know, we leave without that
physical addiction, they're
still drug addict and dealing
with all that stuff, but we
don't have that right now.
Like that was the positive
effect in my opinion of a
horrible sick of a horrible
system. Now,
Folks get out the next day.
You know, Jones in, so to speak,
for the drugs that they're
addicted to the day before.
And so, uh, so anyway, to make a
long story short, Chairman, I
dreamed of this system. Instead
of putting someone on probation
2 years after the fact, which
was a horrible system. Now with
pretrial services, we could
theoretically put them on
probation a week after the
incident, a week after their
issues come to uh uh uh a
threshold that that prompts them
to getting arrested, but
pretrial is different culturally
and legally from probation, and
I just want to ask,
Why that is if someone violates
a court order while on
probation, and they violate a
court order while on pretrial
services. Why?
Why is that different?
And so my question is, how do
we, uh, how does pretrial
services today hold people
accountable that violate court
orders.
Uh, pending trial.
Mr. Charaus.
You're talking about probation
and pretrial. And the main
difference is, if you're on
probation, you've been convicted
of or pled guilty to a crime.
Whereas when you're on pretrial,
you're presumed innocent. You
haven't been convicted of
anything.
And so our
That presumption of innocence
then demands a different
treatment and a different.
Uh
Approach to.
The defendant, right? They're a
defendant, they're not a
probationer or a or a convicted
of anything.
Um, we do definitely want to.
Find better early intervention
strategies.
Um
F.
Um, for folks with behavioral
health, um, concerns so that we
can kind of better divert them
out of the system and they don't
have to have.
Whatever is going on in their
life kind of helped them cycle
back through and cycle back
through.
Um, so we do want to find
strategies to interrupt that, I
don't know if you want,
I, I think the main difference
is the rights afforded to those
in case, I think.
That is the main um.
Difference that we see. I think
a lot of the options for both
populations are similar, as I
mentioned earlier, every single,
uh, non-compliance concern every
potential violation of
conditions of release is
reported.
To the judge, to the parties,
the parties have the opportunity
to file any motions related to
that violation.
Um, and judges have the
opportunity to make decisions
based on those violations, as
Mr. Reichstick mentioned
earlier, there are very specific
violations of conditions are
released that require a hearing
by the judge to make a
determination of either
revocation and additional
conditions are released that
should be ordered or returned
back to pre-trial supervision or
the previous condition, those
provisions, Mr. Chair Senator
Maestas are regardless of the
charge.
So even if it's a misdemeanor,
if you've
committed a significant
violation of your pre-child
conditions of release, the judge
has to hold a hearing and
consider um how best to address
that.
Thank you gentlemen. Thank you,
Chairman, and I think um.
And so I
And I, I appreciate the
conversations I've had with
regards to this topic, but I, I,
I, I have a slight disagreement
with that assessment.
Um, the presumption of innocence
is procedural.
The presumption of innocence is
that in the procedure of the
criminal case, it's the state
that has the burden of proof
that that person is presumed
innocent procedurally throughout
the course of that case, this
presumption of innocence.
Cannot take
Cannot
Deny the realities on the ground
that happened the night before
or the week before or 2 weeks
before, the allegations have to
be taken seriously, people's
lives.
Or uh if somebody gets arrested
multiple times within a couple
of months, their their life is
not right.
Um, and so pretrial services
does not have um
Arrest powers?
Uh
Pretrial service
sees itself
Very distinctly from probation.
If a judge gives you a court
order and you violate that court
order.
It should be treated the same,
whether you are on pretrial
services or whether you're on
probation, in my opinion.
Um, but nonetheless, um, Mr.
Chairman, here we are in 2025. I
think the judiciary is right on,
I think.
The leadership in pretrial is
spot on. I think these systems
are working. I wish they would
have developed faster.
Uh, but we definitely have to
appropriate monies given the,
the, the amount of pretrial of.
Hearings that are happening, we
didn't anticipate that in our
appropriations Act.
And, and fully fund pretrial
services statewide. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman,
uh, Senator, do I have anybody
else?
Uh, Senator O'Malley, OK, so I
can recognize you up to 10
minutes we'll be good. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and I apologize
for not being here on the front
end of this. I actually was
sitting in the chair and the
health committee putting on
Senate Bill 3, which is to
create a behavioral health
infrastructure, which I think is
absolutely critical as part of
this whole discussion, and I am
extremely encouraged the bill
passed 8 to 1. It's bipartisan,
uh, Senator Scherer and I are
the two sponsors, and we'll work
on it some more.
But again, part of the whole
discussion.
About public safety necessarily,
I think it was mentioned by Mr.
Barr, you've got to have
services in place for people to
go or we end up in this, in this
cycle. So just
Again, since I didn't sit in on
the whole thing, I'm very
familiar with this issue. I was
one of the sponsors of this
joint resolution with Senator
Maestas, then Representative
Maestas, and with the then
majority leader, Republican Nate
Gentry in the house. There was a
Republican House, uh, when this
passed during that 30-day
session, and it's come a long
way. I just wanna reiterate that
we were dealing with the
situation where money bail had
been found to be
unconstitutional in the state v.
Brown decision. So we really
were in a
And of crisis mode trying to put
this together and
You know, the comment about more
folks sitting in county lockup,
uh certainly was true because
again, if you.
didn't have the 500 bucks to
bond out, you sat, and so we had
a system that just was, was
unconstitutional. So two things
I want to follow up on. One is,
is, is Senator Brantley's
question, and I need to be
educated more on this because my
uh chief of police here in Santa
Fe, Paul Joy, is always saying,
why aren't people who are not
showing up.
Why are they being released and
in the constitutional language,
it clearly says.
That a person
Uh, who is not detainable on
grounds of dangerousness, nor a
flight risk in the absence of
the bond, and I heard that
comment made. Uh, so there is a
second prong to this, which is
the flight risk question which
Senator Brantly asked. It's the
question that Chief Joy keeps
asking to me. These guys aren't
showing up. They're just not
there and just walk me through
kind of what it looks like on
the ground and, and it sounds
like it's happening in some
place. Maybe it's the unicorn
district where it's happening.
And, and maybe there's, I just,
I just need to understand that
piece better.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh.
Mr. Majority Leader, um.
So, I, I will say
And it, and this relates to some
of what Senator Brantly was
asking and some of what Senator
Maestas was saying, which is
that.
It's true that people get
released if you're not found to
be dangerous under this
constitutional amendment.
Initially
But
But there's, we have other rules
in place that are exercised.
Extremely regularly, at least in
my experience, I have conditions
of release hearings.
A lot, um, for people who have
been alleged to have violated
conditions of release for people
who didn't show up to court.
They got their warrant when they
got picked up, they stayed in
jail. That happens.
All the time it happens every
day in Berlio County. Um, it
happens multiple times a day in
Vern County. Um, and frankly, on
the misdemeanors, it probably
happens even more, um, I think
the metro judges are, you know,
they, I think probably partially
because they have
People for such a limited time.
Um, they revoke people.
All the time.
And so, so the rules allow for
people to be held. People do get
held.
Very regularly. Do, does
everybody who violates every
condition of release, get held?
No, um, that certainly is not
true. Um, and I wouldn't pretend
that it is, but
But I absolutely have people
revoked or violating conditions
of release.
Plenty of my clients do really
well.
Some of my clients do not, and
the clients that do not, um,
they, they end up in jail. And,
and so, um, so I think that
the the on the ground is.
You know, the judges.
Make their best decisions. And
that's where some of the, the
flight risk comes in. I think
it's true that they judges can
set bonds on flight risk. They
don't typically, um, because
it's not part of the initial
detention framework. It's part
of what can happen, especially
specifically for a revocation,
although I have had judges even
on detention cases, um, not
often, but I have had judges set
bonds. I had a, we had a I've
seen because I keep track of
them all, uh.
pair of people who were not from
here who were arrested for
trafficking, they were probably
not going to stay here, they
were on the road through here,
um, the state filed for
detention and there wasn't
anything.
As far as what it was to detain
them per se because they didn't
have any criminal history. But
the judge set bonds on them, um,
because she wanted to be assured
that they had a good reason to
come back. And so that's
perfectly legal. I thought it
was a perfectly appropriate use
of that power in that case, um,
and I think judges can use that,
mostly they don't in most places
in the state, they just either
let the person out or they
don't. And if
if the person is not showing up,
then they say, well, if you're
not going to show up, then we're
gonna make you show up and keep
you in.
Mr. Chair, I appreciate that.
Yeah, that's
Understanding that peace and how
it fits into all of this, I
think is important for all of us
to hear and for folks out who
deal with this every day, and I
have respect for Chief Joy and
what he's dealing with with
mostly misdemeanors.
He wants this constitutional
amendment to apply.
You know, so that he could hold
books that are committing
misdemeanors, and it doesn't,
but then he brings up the issue
of they're not appearing or
There's no way to deal with it.
Some of that is the
It's not this, it's the current
system. It's just perhaps not
working up here as well as it.
Good. Let me just put it that
way.
Uh, second thing, just, just the
final thing I.
You the 1300 no convictions, the
ugly.
Just remind me again, that was
out of how many? 38.
So, yes, sir. So,
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair,
um, and so.
From when the tension started in
Uh, January of 2017, in Bernao
County.
Through December of 2023,
because I only keep track of
cases that have been that are a
year older or more for
disposition because it takes a
while to dispose of cases, um,
there were of cases that had
that had resolved, because not
all cases are done by then. Um,
there were, there were 7,880s
that had been resolved.
And of those 3,882 were on cases
where the pre trial
And of those 3,882 were on cases
where the pre
motion was granted.
Of those
1,358.
And did without a state
conviction.
So on Mr. Chair, can you just
walk the committee through the
reasons why.
Those 1300 were not, I assume
there's a variety of there are a
variety of reasons, yes, sir,
um, if I
mis Chair, Mr. Floor leader, um,
some of them are
Seemingly more reasonable,
right? There are, uh, people who
They, their case got sent to the
feds.
Um, whether they got a
conviction or not, who knows,
but the case went to the, to the
federal government. Um, some of
them, they fled in a different
case and they dismissed this
case. Um, there's not a ton of
those, but there are some of
those. Um, some of those,
there's competency issues and so
the case got dismissed because
of competency issues. There are
more of those, but still not as
many as you would think.
Um, there's.
So
People who died.
Um, there's
More than I would
Like of those, um, that still
leaves, so if you take out all
of those where you just, like,
we'll just pretend that all of
those cases that went to the
feds where they pled where they
know lead this case in order to
get the plea, which oftentimes
that's not true because there's
a reason they dismissed this
case. But we'll pretend that
they got a conviction out of
that. Um, where we pretend that
the competency person would have
been convicted and all those
people who died would have been
convicted. Um, it's still 849
cases, which is 21.9%.
Um, a lot of those cases, it's
because of uncooperative
victims. It's because they
weren't guilty of the charge,
um, you know, there's.
Um, I mean that, that includes
acquittals and and things like
that, right? Um, and if there's
um some of these cases where,
say, a person was charged with
felon possession, and it turns
out that they're not actually a
felon.
Um, things like that. Um, so
there could be any of a number
of reasons, any, any reason a
case could get dismissed, but a
significant percentage of them
is because the the majority of
them is because the state just
flat.
So Mr. Chair, I'll just and I
also appreciated the Chief
Justice's.
State of the judiciary and his
reference, the presumption of
innocence that's something
that's out there that we learn
about.
Early on and kind of as a
fundamental piece. The other
thing we talked about the other
day in this committee, which
applies here as well, is the
constitutional right to a jury
to be tried by your peers.
And again
At the end of the day.
Why I was interested in these
numbers, and I appreciate very
much, Mr. Bar, that you I
remember you, you keep keep keep
track of all of that because the
data is important and the data
has helped us and Chris Moore,
who's from the Santa Fe
Institute up here. It's been
very involved in the data with
the, the tool and the variety of
different things that are out
there.
Uh, and again, and I, Senator
Brantly, I, I hear what you're
saying and, and
There's a perception here.
And I just think trying to line
the perception up with the.
With the data and then making
darn sure that those that are
dangerous.
are held, which is why we did
this, because without this, they
could be dangerous and if they
got money, they're on the
street.
Uh, and that's the logic that
was behind this. Uh, but also
making sure that
You know, those that aren't
dangerous because Mr. Abar, as
you said, every day therein
means a day they're not with
their family, they're not,
they're losing their job and the
system just
Kind of rolls on itself, so.
Again, I appreciate very much
the hearing and
I, I apologize I wasn't here for
the whole thing. I would have
definitely liked, I've heard the
whole thing, but.
I've lived this since it.
Since it passed. So thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I was
very glad to hear from Senate
that Senator, my answer said
that we're not going back, and
because what we had was pretty
bad. When I first got on the
commission, we were spending $9
million a year.
Uh, putting, uh, folks, um,
well, some of the Texas.
Uh, New Mexico, $9 million a
year.
These were people who were stuck
in jail for small infractions.
And there's, there was no money.
They couldn't make, they
couldn't make bail, they could
make, they couldn't pay any of
their fees or anything like
that. And that most of those, it
was families that that suffered
as a result of it. It blew blew
it blew it up.
And so, um, as we mentioned,
this isn't a perfect system. I
mean, it's something that you
will be, uh, you know, dealing
with and hopefully changing, um,
you know, judges do have a lot
of uh ability, right? They, they
can, uh, they don't, I mean, I
know there's a, there was a
whole um uh criticism of the
system. I think it's called the
Arnold Tool, this is, there's a
lot of tools, right? The judge
have, um, but in the end, it's a
human decision, right? I mean,
we're just people and we're
trying to make the best.
decision we can, uh, so, um, I
just wanted to bring that up
because
I don't want to go back.
Thank you
Thank you, um, pal, and
interesting presentation. I, uh,
Couple of weeks ago, back in the
room, you'll see Chief story.
He's the chief of police for the
city of Las Cruces. He's
relatively new and really trying
to shake things up at lunch with
him and the new district
attorney in Las Cruces, uh,
Fernando Mascias, who many of
you all met. There's something
really interesting to me if you
look at this chart, if any of
you all in the room have access
to it.
This is a chart we were given
here today that looks at the
different judicial districts in
the state and then the number of
motions that were filed for
pretrial detention and then the
outcomes over the last year,
it's on page 13 of
Of the handout.
And it looks like this.
If you, you have to number them
yourself because they didn't
print well, but if you go down 3
lines, you're gonna see, um,
number of motions filed 184.
If you see that, that's the 3rd
district. That's where I come
from. That's where Senator
Brantley and I come from.
You're gonna see 26.3.
26%, a little bit, almost 27% of
those motions were granted.
If you look at all the other
districts, that's an outlier.
a complete outlier.
Right
Nobody's close, really, to the
3rd district and how few
pretrial motions were granted.
Are you still with me?
Now
Chief story we'll tell you when
him and I had lunch with
Fernando Mascias when he took
office January 1st of this year.
He had 7 prosecutors.
In Donana County.
There are 30 in Santa Fe
comparable sized city.
and Donatta County.
He's now taking it to 17 in a
matter of a month.
And so why should we be
surprised that they're not
getting pretrial motions granted
in the 3rd district at a dismal
rate when all the other
districts are doing much better
when you have a, um, an
inadequately staffed district
attorney's office. I use these,
these numbers and this example
to try and illustrate that
ultimately, so much of what ails
us when it comes to crime are
the people that are responsible
for doing things that aren't
getting the job done.
The preceding district attorney
just wasn't getting the job
done.
And he was defeated as an
incumbent.
Um, when I, when we met here,
uh, our last meeting, I, I told
you all the story about a friend
who, um, not really a friend,
somebody I've come to know who
goes around the states and
evaluates different
legislatures, and I asked them
what's different about New
Mexico? And she said, in New
Mexico, you all are so
determined not to hurt one
another's feelings.
Um,
And she, she makes a good point.
I've noticed that over the years
I've been here, there's an
increasing resistance to
confronting things that we don't
want to confront.
Or, or calling out hard truths
or hurting one another's
feelings, but I just did, I just
essentially said, look at these
numbers and understand that if
you only have 7 prosecutors, and
in a month you've gone to 17,
and why is the 3rd then so
abysmally low in their pretrial
detention motions granted as
cause they're clearly
understaffed, right? Or under
supervised or undermanaged or
whatever it may be.
And that's not a, that's not an
easy accusation to make, but
somebody has to say it.
That's why the title of today's
presentation, The Good, the Bad
and the Ugly, you know, I mean,
you, um, it's too bad the chief
has left. It's probably good for
me. I have cases in front of the
Supreme Court from time to time,
um, and that relationship is
very valued, but there's one
strange thing that happens when
you're a chair of this
committee, which is you
establish good relationships
with judges and prosecutors and
law enforcement, and they tell
you things.
Right, and when they talk to you
off the record and on the phone
on Saturday mornings, the judges
will say that they're not
holding people because district
attorneys are not doing a good
enough job of presenting a case
for detention. They're not
coming in prepared. I think
that's probably true.
Uh, conversely, um, district
attorneys will say it's the
judge's fault because the judges
give us too tight of a deadline.
What is it, 3 days or something
like that to get a case together
and prove all of these things in
3 days. And I think that's
probably true also.
As a practicing lawyer, I don't
have any deadline that requires
me to do anything in 3 days. Uh,
and, and I, I couldn't begin to
perform on that kind of a uh a
deadline.
Um, so that strikes me as,
again, the district attorneys
may have a point.
There are that the expectations
on them were too great. Um, and
the judges will point back at
the district attorneys, and
they'll all point at the law
enforcement. Sorry, Chief, but
they'll all, when they're
talking to me, they'll say, hey,
the cops aren't prepared and we,
we have an enormous amount of
data. When you look at the data
we're presented during the
interim, most cases get lost.
Because of improper evidence
gathering.
And that's, we haven't talked
about that here today, but most
of the cases are lost and
dismissed and not detained
because improper evidence
gathering, that means we've got
to do a better job of working
with our law enforcement
officers to make sure they know
the law, and, and they're well
trained and they understand the
consequences, and frankly,
they're supervised, um, and
there are consequences when they
don't, um, gather the evidence,
right? But that, but we have all
of this incredible data and the
answers become really so clear
to us, really when we begin to
look at those things.
the governor's expressed
frustration and I share her
frustration 100% with this
notion and the public that we
have a catch and release system
out there. And, and this
committee's done, I think, uh,
commendable work, really, which
is that it uh to, to, so
sessions ago, we began to ask
questions about the Arnold tool.
We didn't understand
This Arnold Tool business we
were talking about.
I think we have to accept the
political realities, which is I,
I, I'm clearly of the belief
that prosecutors, when there's
any question on when a case
first comes in, they almost
automatically file a motion for
pretrial detention.
Because politically, and I see
you all are nodding your heads
affirmatively. Defense and
prosecutors, they're
automatically filing a pretrial
detention motion because, first
of all, the deadline is so swift
that you gotta do it anyway,
right? And everybody's nodding
their heads, yes.
So maybe we need to think about
that deadline.
And then the second reason
prosecutors do it is because
politically they have to do so.
Because if that person is not
detained, and they go out and
they commit another crime, the
finger will get pointed back at
that district attorney who's
running for office public
official just like the rest of
us, and somebody's gonna say,
why didn't you file a motion to
detain that individual?
And so to make sure that your
hands are lily white on all of
this. The prosecutors filed
pretrial motions in every case.
This is the good, the bad, and
the ugly.
Right? And you guys are all nod
your heads affirmatively.
The tails wagging the dog here,
folks.
Right? So, so district attorneys
file a pretrial detention
motions in every case, public
defenders have to respond, go to
hearings on every case, a lot of
resources, and we're not doing
anything like a meaningful,
thoughtful approach to really
the, the motion practice of
pretrial detentions. And then,
as I pointed out, we're getting
completely different results all
over the state.
Senator Worth and I've been
around for a long time. When
this bail reform bill came
about, him and I debated it a
lot.
And I, and I had some real
concerns with it. I didn't vote
for it in the end, because I was
concerned that the language was
so loose, and we've heard that
here today, there's so much
subjective discretion in the in
the judges, it was very clear to
me one thing that would happen,
that a judge in Lee and Chavez,
and you guys are all nodding
your heads and you're smiling.
If you're a judge and Lee and
Chavez and other parts of the
state, you're, you're gonna see
these pretrial detention motions
very differently than you are in
Santa Fe.
And if you don't believe it,
look at the statistics.
Where, where are the pretrial
motions granted? I, I give you
the example of Donatta County,
where they were barely granted.
And, and I'm friends with the
judges down there. They'll tell
me the DA's didn't come in
prepared.
OK.
Look at the look at Donianta
County was 26%, like 1 in 4
motions were granted for
pretrial detention. In the 13th
district.
Almost 80%.
Other motions are granted.
I Is that because the crooks,
there are worse or better or you
want, I know you want to address
this, but I, I, I'll, I'll come
back to you at the end and
please remember to come back and
tell me why, right? You got 80%
of those are granted in, in
that, in that county.
Um, and I'm sorry, I'm looking
at 13th. I'm wrong. That's,
that's, uh, the 13th district,
80%, that's McKinley San Juan,
right? That's Farmington.
Sandy
on the 13th. You're right, I'm
sorry. I'm looking, I was
looking at the 11th.
Uh, which is also high, 70,
almost 71%, right? McKinley San
Juan, Farmington.
The other one, Sandoval, I guess
Sandoval is gonna include what
my, my uh geography principally
Rio Rancho,
right?
Kind of a conservative place,
that real Rancho, I'm told,
right?
Farmington
McKinley San Juan, kind of a
conservative place.
Uh
Santa Fe, 1st District, 36%, 1
in 3. My concern that, that
Senator Werth and I had a good
discussion about the time was
that we would end up with a
disparity based on political
geography and so I, I, I think
that that's probably still true.
Um, in terms of pretrial
detention. If, if you're, if
you're arrested for a certain
crime and in Lee Hobbs, Chavez
County.
Farmington, you're gonna get
held.
And if you get arrested for that
same crime in Santa Fe, maybe
not.
Probably not.
And Donana County the last
several years, no chance, right?
I don't, I don't think that's, I
don't think that's, uh, the way
we want this to be working, and,
and I think the only way we're
going to change some of that is
by me talking about the good,
the bad, and the ugly.
We've learned in this committee,
I think, without any question
about it, and everyone here
knows the, the, the, the trick
to crime is certain and swift
justice.
And it's not adding years.
Uh,
nobody's ever gonna be
convinced. I don't think in this
room, I'm looking at my
colleagues, we've been here too
long. We know that adding more
years to sentences, really
accomplishes really nothing at
all.
But the swiftness and certainty
of being caught and convicted is
important and I think it's
important for us to recognize
that when we, when we, uh, years
ago, we started looking at these
Arnold tools. The Arnold tool
was a tool that the courts were
relying upon to determine
whether somebody should be
released or not released based
on a computerized model, and,
and this committee, I think
rightfully began to realize that
it's the old garbage in garbage
out model and, and Carl, you
mentioned that this was
recalibrated last year, uh, you
may say that it's not. I don't
mean to put
in the courts on the, on the
hook, but I think part of the
reason it was recalibrated was
because this committee was
asking a lot of hard questions
about the Arnold Tool, and I'll
give you the good example. I, I,
I, I'm not, I don't want to do
it back and forth because I
won't get a chance to make my
points and I know it's not fair
to you, but I'll, I'll come back
to you at the end. Hold, hold
the thought.
Mohammad Sayed was a 51-year old
Afghan immigrant. He was
arrested in August of 22 in
Albuquerque, charged with
multiple counts. You all
remember the case series of
shootings. Several Muslim men,
very high profile case.
He was charged initially with 2
murders, placed initial
initially uh eventually connect
them to 4 murders.
The Arnold tool was applied,
recommended that he be released
on his own recognizance.
Christian Ben Como, 21, he was
arrested after shooting his
stepmother.
At the graduation ceremony at
the Albuquerque Convention
Center last year.
is charged with aggravated
assault, unlawful carrying of a
weapon, aggravated battery.
He shot his stepmother in the
neck.
When she tried to hug him, his
graduation ceremony.
Arnold Tool?
Recommended he be released.
its own recognizance.
I bring up these aberrant maybe
cases and, and, and in these
hearings to, to help us reflect
on where we're at and where
we're going, right? And, and
I've seen, I really do believe
in the last year or two as a
result of our hearings and our
discussion here, the court's
dialing back the reliance on the
tool or to the AOC's position
recalibrating, recalibrating the
Arnold tool.
I want to just very briefly
address some of the comments are
made, but I'm gonna do it this
way. Um, Mark Twain.
Said, there are lies, damn lies,
and statistics.
Um, that's a, a quote that I'm
fond of because I think it's his
way of saying statistics can be
used to support very poor
arguments and, in my law
practice, I spent a lot of my
time taking apart statistics and
experts who come back with
statistics and showing the
fallacies in those statistics.
One of the fallacies, I think,
again with all due respect to
the court, and again, I'm able
to do this easier because the
Chief Justice isn't here in the
room, but I, but I've done it
with her and she's been very
open.
with Dave Thompson too. The,
the, the statistics that are
presented here sometimes are,
well, there's very little
statistical evidence that an
individual gets out and
reoffends.
And we have these studies that
we pay for at UNM that they do
that and we say an individual
offends and then statistically,
they're unlikely to reoffend.
And that's not a true picture.
Because all we're doing is we're
comparing that individual and
whether that individual is
re-arrested a second time.
And I see you nodding your head
affirmatively, Mr. District
Attorney. The getting arrested a
second time is not the same as
saying you didn't offend again,
it just means we didn't catch
it.
Right? So if you're a car thief
and we arrest you the first time
and we release you. And then we
don't see you get re-arrested,
uh, at all for a year or 2
years, doesn't mean you didn't
break it into another car.
This means, means you were
lucky, didn't get caught or
didn't get charged or didn't get
convicted.
Um, that's what that means. It
doesn't mean that you didn't
reoffend, but we're, we're using
that statistic to say, there's
the evidence shows you don't
reoffend.
That's a spin, and we should at
least call out the spin. The
other, the other spin that's
used in that study is that um
you watch this, you'll see it
oftentimes, you'll say the
reoffense, they didn't reoffend
for a violent offense.
Right. Well, that's again a
game.
That, that car, the car person
who uh uh breaks into a car and
robs a car, if they don't, if
they only get rearrested for
breaking into cars and breaking
into cars and breaking cars,
statistically.
They, there's 0% of reoffense
for a violent crime. And that's
the way the AOC will use that
statistic. We'll talk them out.
They didn't reoffend for a
violent crime. Well, we're not
talking about necessarily just
violent crime. I about the car,
car guy, right?
So watch for the statistics, be
careful with them.
Let's, let's use them because we
have great information, great
data.
Those of you that are
participating in the interim, we
have an incredible RLFC study
and report, please curl up with
it. It's amazing.
Really, the data that our own
staff does here in this
building.
On unsurpassable and, and really
gives us all the answers.
And the answers are not, uh,
detaining people based on the
charge.
Of the, of the crime.
Because when we know what that
does, that leads could
prosecutors to charge crimes.
And I see all you nod your heads
again, we, we all know the game
up here. Let's just call it out.
Right, if we're gonna do this
pretrial detention, so-called
pretrial detention solution
that's been offered us the last
couple of years, and I've taken
all the hits for it, you know, I
get the blame for it, and I'm,
I, I own it.
Uh, I'm, I'm proud to have done
it, but I know the game.
Uh, I'm up, I'm up with it,
right? And so, if, if the game
is, well, we're gonna, we're
gonna hold you and presume
you're guilty simply by the
charge that we charge you with.
We're gonna charge you with
charges.
to get you help.
You're all nodding your heads,
yes, we're, we're on to the game
up here, and, and some of us
don't play.
Won't play.
I've gone on, um, I appreciate
your consideration. I, I told
you I'd come back to um
Some of you all again, but Mr.
Barr, even, even when we talk
about these statistics, you
know, there was, there was some
bite on what you were saying,
which is, hey, look at all of
these pretrial motions that are
filed and I think you were
talking about 2nd District,
Burke County, right? So look at
all these pretrial motions that
were filed, uh, prosecutor
thought these people should be
held, and statistically, so few
of those actually ever resulted
in a conviction.
No, you were good and honest
about saying there's a lot of
reasons there might not have
been a conviction, and some of
them, as you said, somebody,
some of those folks might have
been innocent.
Right? Uh, or, or certainly not
guilty.
But um it'd be a mistake, I
think you would agree, we'd all
agree that, uh, that, that, um,
all, all of those pretrial
motions that were denied uh or
were granted or directly tied to
whether a person was innocent or
guilty of the crime, as you
said, as you said, victims may
not show up.
cops may be bought off.
Um, well, we're, we know, we,
we, uh, there's laughter about
that, but I bring that up over
and over. It's not funny.
I mean, I, I, I'm, I'm probably
making a lot of this more than
certainly the Albuquerque media
does or Albuquerque Public does,
but this is the most deplorable
thing I can remember in a
lifetime.
That, that we have that level of
corruption right in front of our
face.
Going on for decades.
Now we're talking about
implicating the state police
potentially.
Um
Or the sheriff's department.
Yeah, we, we have a, we have.
We're rotten.
At at the core and and the
ultimately here the the greatest
uh hurt for me is there are a
lot of great cops.
Including the chief back there,
not a really, really great cops.
And, and I cannot imagine how
discouraging it must be for two
reasons. One is to, to know this
for years going on and maybe
refusing to participate and
feeling like maybe they were
pressured into participating.
Um, and, and.
I, I can't imagine. But the
other thing that I think is hard
for cops, and I'm glad again the
chief is here. Oh all cops hear
this. They've got to be so
incredibly demoralized.
To see people arrested and
released and arrested and
released over and over.
And I feel for them too, cause I
would be.
I would be incredibly
demoralizing and so when we
wonder why we can't recruit more
cops. We keep paying them more
money, we keep offering more
things. Uh, we've got, we've
gotta make that always a proud
position in our society, and we
got to be, and we are proud of
them and, and we need them proud
of themselves, and that means
having them see that when bad
people do bad things, they can
arrest them knowing we're gonna,
the rest of us are going to do
something about it.
So, that's my little speech for
today, I think. Carl, you wanted
to say something, Mr. Barr, you
want to say something too, you
mean might come up and
the last word, um, so, uh, no,
I'll go, I'll go first. I
didn't, I just wanted to answer
two things actually, one, the,
the
With the
uh corruption that was
to me,
um, and it made me think back
when I was a prosecutor and
wondering if I
should have.
I, I understand why you would,
um, but, uh,
want to answer just because you
I think it's because if you look
at the number of motions they
filed, which is pretty low. And,
and especially for a, a district
of the size that they are, and
I've had discussions with the
elected district attorney, um,
in the 13th Barbara Romo, who I
find to be uh to really, really
care about her ethics, and so I
think she.
really doesn't want to file
unless she thinks she should
win. And, and so in that
calculation that I think that
you were talking about, um, Mr.
Chair, um, of, you know,
frankly, I am sometimes
surprised at the DA's in the
second don't file on just every
felony and I obviously don't
want them to. Um, they already
overfi in my opinion, but um,
but I
You know, I, I understand having
been a prosecutor, um, for a
long time, longer than I was,
I've been a public defender. Um,
I understand why people would,
why prosecutors would file for
the pre-trial detention and it's
exactly what you were saying.
Uh, district Attorney Romo
doesn't do it. And, and she, she
really thinks, I think very hard
about whether or not she can
actually prove her case. And so
when it comes down to time to do
that motion.
They win.
And, and that's why they win,
because
They're going in knowing they
should win that case. And, and
so.
I wish that happened more, um,
because I, I certainly don't
think that that happens or has
ever happened, um, in Bernaleo
County. Um, I, I
They
I
come across prosecutors.
Who, not as much, but I
definitely have prosecutors come
in and say, yes, there's my
motion.
They're not gonna say anything
else because you know they can't
support the motion.
And
That's nice. Yeah, I, I just, I,
I like to respond. That's a
brilliant observation. Thank you
for that. I mean, uh, because
you're right, I, I saw, if, if
you have that chart, that, that
district looks like an 80,
almost an 80% success on their
motions, and that's because
you've got a great DA and thank
you for calling out that DA.
That's somebody who's paying
attention, follow them
judiciously, as opposed to
indiscriminately, right? And
it's just a good example that we
have all of this data that if we
learn to use it, I'm looking at
my
artististical friend over here,
whatever, you know, we have all
this data, we learn to use it,
we can, we can combat crime
intelligently instead of in
front of movie cameras and the
TV news,
um,
Streisand, Mr. Chair, you
talked about the public safety
assessment score.
I was telling Mr. Bada and Mr.
Ray.
Uh, before the hearing that.
I'm surprised we don't see our
prosecutors using that score
more often to.
Think about
they scored a 3 or 4. They
scored really high risk on the
tool. Should I be thinking about
a pre-trial detention motion in
this case, and that, that hasn't
really sunk in as a practice,
and it, that's always surprised
me a little bit.
I also think
Another extraordinarily valuable
tool that we often forget about
that our pretrial services
provide is that comprehensive
background check.
And those are our folks working
overnight to get the judge.
The background check in the
morning, because in the, in the
old days.
The only thing the judge had to
go on was whether they knew that
defendant and maybe a quick
search through the file.
Now we can tell you if you got a
pending on a state warrant.
Pending, you know, other honest
state convictions or state
convictions, and that judge has
a much more complete picture.
Of that defendant, including
whether they failed to appear,
you know, uh, multiple times. So
I think that's also, you know, a
really important
Part of our pretrial services
program that I think often gets.
Um
Overlooked. And then the last
thing I wanted to say, Mr.
Chair, is one of the things we
are always looking to do is
partner.
With more county detention
centers to, to get that data
share and for whatever reason,
uh, they're only a very few that
that like to do that with us
having that instant information
available about the defendants,
you know, demographic
information about their release
date, and then we can get that
to the judge and we know what's
happening. We'll also know about
re-arrest then very, very
quickly.
Um, and that just helps that
public safety aspect, and that's
Been a challenge in in most of
that that invites a good
discussion about maybe some
additional legislation where
there is a place for additional
legislation the the governor to
her credit, uh had uh
legislation for data sharing, it
would seem that when we have all
of this data, there needs to be
a much better job sharing that
you're telling me that, that the
courts could use better data
sharing from MDC.
Um, and so maybe that's
something we've got to, got to
work on at MDC and I, I want to
appreciate the comments of
Senator O'Malley as well. We
always need to remember this as
a county commissioner, Senator
O'Malley, and I'm a former
county commissioner. You, you
spoke the truth there too, which
is that sometimes when you're on
the county commission, you're
looking at dollars and cents,
and how much money you're
spending on detention, and
that's maybe not where you want
to spend your money. Um, and
that's a reality, we ought to
accept that too is that
sometimes maybe Albuquerque's
decided spending money on
incarceration is not where they
choose to spend their money.
And, and my understanding is
that oftentimes MDC is
half-staffed, maybe, and half
populated.
So
Thank you all for the panel.
Thank you for letting me
pontificate a little bit.
Hope it's been, uh, like I said,
some, something for us to keep
talking about.
We're gonna, we're gonna get
done at 5 game. I'll have you
out at 5.
So.
I appreciate you hearing our
bill today.
Um, Senator Boone and I are
bringing a bill to you.
Senate Bill 8 is what we're
gonna talk about right now.
And uh it, it is relating to a
Uh, alone.
Repayment program.
For state or for veterinaries in
rural areas.
And I have with me today a lot
of experts.
Mr. Chair.
Um, and
I don't have enough chairs for
all the experts, but they're
willing to jump up here and and
back me up, I'm sure.
For sure, and so.
Uh, we have high red, please
introduce yourself.
My name is
Heather Oberro. I'm the
financial director at the New
Mexico Higher Education
Department.
I'm
Doctor Samantha with New Mexico
livestock.
Uh
Mr. Chairman and and member
senators I'm John Winslow. I'm
the extension veterinarian with
New Mexico State University and
a 39 year veterinary
practitioner in New Mexico.
And Miss chair if I could, uh,
this is Senator Boone. I'll let
him introduce himself because
some of you may not know him
real well.
Chair members of the committee,
Pat Boone.
Newly elected
Senator from District 207
Eastern New Mexico, Curry.
Um, but, uh, but anyway, yeah,
if one of your folks was talking
longer than you'd like for them
to, I count on you to cut them
off, all right?
OK, Mr. Chair, the main part of
this deal
As we've been in your committee
before.
And we haven't got it out of
your committee. So I've been
trying to sculpture this bill,
and I had a lot of help from
Jeff Witty
Department of A
Mexico Department of Ag on this
bill.
And so there's some things that
that probably you will like some
things you may not, some of this
differs some from last year, but
just to start out we're talking
about.
Uh
The title
Uh, the definitions.
On uh start online 24, page 1.
Line 19, page 2.
The requirements of higher ed.
Is line 23, page 2.
The selection committee have
these veterinarians will be what
how these possible candidates
will be selected, page 3.
Line 13. The duties of the
committee that we set up.
Is on page 3 line 18.
The qualifications of
applicants, page 4, line 1.
The award criteria.
Is on page 4 line 20.
The contract terms.
Page 5, 19.
The clawbacks.
If they do not fulfill the
contract.
Page 6, line 13, the release
without a penalty.
Is page 7, line 10.
The fund that we set up.
Is page 8, line 2, the reports
to be given.
Page 8, line 13.
And the final, the
appropriation, which is $5
million page 9.
Line 8.
Now that's the outline of my
bill, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I don't want to.
I gave you key places to look
for your questions.
And I'm ready to take them.
Mr.
Right, and Steve Lucero.
Uh, we'll recognize you all for
up to 2 minutes, given your
total time. So, Mr. Patterson.
You're recognized up to 2
minutes, sir.
Thank you, sir. My name is Tom
Patterson. I'm a County rancher.
I served as president-elect for
the New Mexico Cas Association.
We support SBA.
At the ranch level, we want to
produce our beef safely and
humanely.
The same goes for sheep and goat
producers.
You and other consumers expect
nothing less.
To do that, we have to have
access to large food and
veterinarians who can help us
provide responsible prompt care
for our livestock.
At the beginning of this year,
we had a,280,000 head of cattle
in New Mexico.
75,000 head of sheep and 6000
head of goats.
Currently, the estimate is that
we have less than 40
veterinarians in New Mexico who
provides some measure of large
food animal.
Services. Many are approaching
retirement.
That's not enough.
They're not evenly distributed
across the state in the
situation is getting worse. We
need more and we need them in
underserved areas.
loan repayment program is part
of the answer to the problem.
It's modeled, particularly after
the North Dakota model and they
found that if you keep
veterinarians in a place for 4
years, reliable likely to stick.
We urge you to support SBA.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bradley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Casey Spradley and I'm the 4th
generation to go home and live
on and manage my family ranch in
northwestern New Mexico.
One of the most important things
to myself and my family is the
care and to care and provide for
our animals.
And although we have a basic
knowledge of animal.
Um
Um
There are times, however, when
we
The past 20 years.
Or
OK
So over the past 20 years it has
become increasingly difficult to
access large animal
veterinarians. And in the past
10 years, all the vets that have
come to my ranch have come over
2 hours drive over 2 hours to
come with 2 to the ranch.
Uh, sometimes we haven't even
been able to get a veterinarian
to come and when a large animal
is in stress and suffering,
we're not always able to
transport them to the
veterinarian, and there's
absolutely nothing more heart
wrenching than not being able to
carry out.
So the other thing that's a
critical issues right now is
that we've passed a federal be
directed act and that requires
that we have a veterinarian by
relationship and when we don't
have that relationship where we
cannot access a vet. We cannot
actually buy the medicine that
we need to take care of it.
And in addition to that, it also
affects simple things such as
the minerals and vitamins, and
there's products that increase
the efficiency of the vaccines
that we give them to keep them
from being sick, so this
improves their total animal
health.
Um, and then the other thing
that my particular ranch and I
know there's other areas in the
state are deficient in thymine
and that is um.
It's, it's the worst thing you
can ever see a cow go through,
to be honest with you.
And so I would just like to ask
you guys to please consider this
bill, Bill 8, the veterinary
loan repayment because Mexico,
rural New Mexico and
agricultural producers are in
serious and dire need of
veterinarians to actually come
and be part of our operations.
Thank you.
See Lucero
Mr. Chairman, committee members,
my name's Steve, I'm a cattle
rancher. I also, I also retired
from as the uh.
Benival County agricultural
agent after 18 years.
I've had
A wealth of opportunities to
work with you throughout Mexico.
I'm also, I'd like to let you
know that I've been co-chair and
presenter for the Mexico cattle
or New Mexico youth management
camp, which is a week-long
school that we teach youth ages
15 to 19 years of age.
Good.
ranching types, including
And my husbandry.
Two participants from the ranch
camp.
From Sandoval County have gone
on to earn their veterinary
degree. A third one is currently
working on her degree.
And working with these
individuals, I know that the
there's um an interest and
ability among our youth to
become veterinarians.
The fear is that the debt
incurred while earning their
degree is tremendous.
Many of them change their mind
and possibly
Um, abandon that dream.
Those that get through
veterinary school, oftentimes
they are unable to pay off their
loans if they move back to rural
Mexico.
This bill, that's uh.
Hm
Loan repayment program.
Well, be an incentive for them
to pursue their dream and to
return home to ruling Mexico we
desperately need them.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Lucero.
You don't have any registered uh
speakers in opposition. I'll go
to members of the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
gonna
Demonstrate my ignorance about a
few things. Um, when you say a
food.
Um, is it called?
And there's a, there's a
specialty here.
Of the veterinarian, it has to
do with food animal.
OK, so that's just a
veterinarian that has a
specialty and.
Uh, working with animals that
are gonna be food, or is that,
is that OK? So that does not
mean, uh, for example,
veterinarian would
Treat horses or anything like
that. I mean, um.
Let me explain. When you get out
in the country. Uh-huh. And you
start a vet practice, you treat
everything from the barn cat to
the cow dog to the whatever else
is out there.
But this is primarily
specialized in food animals.
OK, I, I didn't know there was a
specialty like that. I just
thought there were large animals
and, you know, cats and dogs.
OK, so that's helpful.
Um
And, and just out of curiosity,
how did you come up with that
amount, the, what is it, $5
million?
Did you kind of like
I'm gonna turn that over to
higher ed.
OK.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Senator O'Malley, the
um 5 million is for, um, a
period of time, so the sunset is
2031. So essentially we are
attempting to ward 10
individuals, so it's basically a
backloading bill, which
essentially has 15,000 for the
first year, 15,000 for the
second year, and then we're
gonna bump it to 25,000 for the
3rd and 4th year. So essentially
$80,000 for one participant, so
with that we anticipate.
that we can fund at least 10
individuals on this particular
program per year. OK.
Thank you. I don't have any more
questions, Mr. Chair?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you guys for the presentation.
We certainly know that there's a
shortage of veterinarians and
How needed this is and I think
the idea of creating a fund is
just smart money management as a
way to get that. Can you just
speak very briefly to the FIR
concern about uh the
The financial implications to
the the board of Veterinarian
Medicine, cause when I looked
through the bill, there doesn't
seem to be an impact to them,
but they do claim in the FIR
that there's a financial impact.
Can you speak to that briefly?
Chair,
Senator B uh Brantley, so the
New Mexico Board of Veterinary
Medicine, when they heard about
this bill and filed the FIR,
they did not realize at the time
that the program is going to be
administered by higher education
department. They were unaware.
They thought they were gonna be
in charge of the administration.
I've talked to the chairman of
the board, and they are uh uh
gonna be rescinding that or or
adjusting that FIR to reflect
that they will not have a
responsibility with the
administration of this program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
clarifies it.
What?
Uh, thank you, Ms. J. Just a
question of following up on
Senator O'Malley's, I mean, is
the term food animal veterinary.
Food animal veterinary medical
services defined in this bill? I
mean, does everyone, I didn't
see a definition for that in
here.
I'm throughout the bill, there's
a reference to page 4 line 8.
So that an applicant shall be
employed full time in private
practice providing food, animal,
veterinary medical services.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, so I, I would.
Cautiously use the word
specialty because that is
actually defined in the
veterinary Practice Act, but a
food animal veterinarian is
someone who the primary focus.
I'm sorry, I don't do well with
Mikes, the the primary focus of
their practice revolves around
food animal medicine now is um
Senator Woods mentioned that may
include other animals on the
farmer ranch that support that
industry, cause you're not ever
going to go out to the farmer
ranch and only work on cows or
just sheep or just goats, and so
that may include horses that are
used to gather livestock, uh,
dogs that are also used to help
work and gather livestock, etc.
But it is a primary um focus of
the practice.
So I guess I, I mean this.
Issue of
Veterinarians and the shortage
is just extraordinary throughout
the state.
Uh, has there been any thought
about
I mean, I'd love to see it.
$100 million fund and
Not just have it targeted.
You know, this is, this is a
unique specialized type of
veterinary medicine.
Is there any other kind of
program for other.
And, you know, other types of
veterinarians or is this the
first of its kind to be created.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, so we do have our
witchy, um, Interstate
commission on higher education,
um, which supports veterinarians
on all level, um, so whether
it's small or large animal, um,
so those individuals we support
10 individuals, um, of course,
and we help support them as
they're going into a vet school
within the western region, so
essentially, yes, the veterinary
bill is um the veterinary loan
repayment program is one that
has not been created.
And, and Mr. Chair and senator,
that which you program there're
required to come back to New
Mexico for so many years.
And so how many?
New Mexico students have gone
through the itchy and come back.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, so we have a 1%
default rate, so all, um, are
witchy and uh which is the
veterinary and dental that we
support. I'll come back to the
state of New Mexico, and I think
as you can see in this
particular legislation is the
penalties are fairly steep. So
when you sign that contract to
come back to the state of New
Mexico, you have roots here in
the state and you are not going
to default on that contract, um,
which is the 18% interest and 3
times the principal balance, so
we do have a very.
successful on loan repayment and
loan for service program.
So, how many New Mexico, so
basically it sounds like
everyone that's going up is
coming back or 99% are coming
back. How many does that equate
to how many veterinarians are
going through that process and
coming back.
So we fund 10 individuals, uh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, 10 individuals per
year, um, they usually go
through a 4 year program upon
the completion of their 4-year
program, then at that point they
sometimes do specialty programs.
They have to serve within the
state of New Mexico for 3 years,
so the service commitment within
the state is to practice for 3
years to get that particular
loan that was provided by the
higher education department
forgiven.
So Mr. Chair, again, I I don't.
I get where this is going, I
think it's fantastic that
you've, we're creating an
incentive to try and keep folks
here. I do worry about the scope
of this, just because this is
such a big.
Issue or we, are we now going to
create a
A new
bond for
You know, non-food animal
veterinarians.
I mean, again, why don't we, it
just feels like we should have a
veterinarian fund and encourage,
we need vets desperately in
this, in this state, both this
specific type and more broadly,
so I just, I worry a little bit
about that, but that's, you
know, that's a, I guess that's
gonna be a policy question.
Yeah, so.
Mr. Cha.
Senator, all veterinarians when
they go to vet school.
They learn how to work on dogs.
They learn how to work on cats.
They learn how to walk, work on
birds.
Cattle, horses.
The whole, the whole spectrum of
of animal.
Kingdom.
And
It's up to them.
To decide if they're gonna
practice the whole spectrum, or
if they're gonna just be the
food animal or large animal or
small animal.
And so it's not like we're.
Separating these people out.
From the get-go, they will be
separated out according when
they graduate when they come
home, that's when they'll decide
what they're gonna do and
they're the people that are
gonna be.
Uh, participating and benefiting
from this program, the ones that
choose to specialize in the food
animal practice.
They're the ones that were
Am I correct in that?
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Senator. I
to kind of address a couple of
those questions that you had
there to uh expound on the
answer is, is that that is true
that veterinarians generally
have a general education and
then they they decide what kind
of practice they're gonna have.
So the, the discrepancy and the
reason that this bill is so
important is because from an
economic standpoint, it does not
make sense to enter into
livestock practice in a rural
area.
From an economic standpoint,
they cannot compete with what
the urban areas are able to
provide as a salary. The
difference right now across the
nation is that a companion,
somebody that works on companion
animals or pets, they're
starting salaries is $133,000 a
year, comparatively a food,
somebody that touches food
animals or horses, they're
starting salary is about
$100,000. Now that's in the
nation. That's not New Mexico. I
can tell you that those numbers
are quite different in New
Mexico.
Especially in rural practices,
because the rural practices
cannot offer the same salary. So
when you get these even country
kids that go to veterinary
school and graduate, that
they've been accustomed to
watching their hometown
veterinarian work.
And they've watched them work
themselves to death.
And so all of a sudden they're
in veterinary school and they
find out there's a 3.6% of all
the veterinarians in the United
States work on livestock or food
animal.
Have a food animal component to
their practice, 3.6%.
And so the problem with it is,
is that these kids are smart.
They go, they have a large debt,
the average debt just intuition
and fees for our New Mexico
students ranges from 110 to
$160,000. That does not include
living expenses.
Now the witchy program supports
that with the support fee of
$35,400.
Per year, which helps offset
that tuition a great deal, but
they still will have 100, the
average is $179,000 worth of
debt when they graduate.
And so they can't come back and
look at that little practice in
r New Mexico that's gonna pay
him $80,000 a year.
So we have to do something now
in the urban areas, even though
there are still shortages of
veterinarians. We actually have
20 chairs now, the, the last 10
or the last 2 years we've had 10
chairs with which he before that
it was 8.
Uh, for many years. We now have
10 chairs up to 10 chairs at
Texas Tech and now we have the
opportunity to bring back 20
students a year.
If we feel our, if we feel our
pool. And so the majority of
those 75% of all graduate
veterinarians work on companion
animals.
To some degree. So even in the
country, they're working on
companion animals along with
livestock. But we have to do
something to off to offset the
economic.
Downturn for rural veterinary
practitioners.
Because they cannot make it
outside of an urban area.
So you're just one of the, I may
have missed it and here he's
there, I mean, there's a
requirement that they're
employed full time. Is there a
time period scope?
are they or or once the loan.
So they get the loan paid off,
they're employed full time. I
mean, I appreciate very much, I
mean, I think that the scope of
the training is important
because they're making a
decision to come back, which is
great. I get that.
But can they the next year
decide.
They want to switch the practice
and go into.
Dogs and cats, birds and bees,
whatever they want to do. Or is
there, or is there a time frame
in here for component is 4
years. Over the 4 years, they,
they have to serve one year,
they get a payment towards their
tuition. The payment goes I
said, it's paid directly to
their lending agency. So that
happens 4 years in a row after
the 5th year, no, we don't have
anything, but I can tell you
from the North Dakota data,
which that program is operated
for about 13 years. They have a
92% retention rate on
those that have accepted the
loan, which
I think we'd all be willing to
put up with that if we could get
that many to come back and stay.
And I think what we find is that
we have to have them long enough
to become ingrained into a
community, which is another
point. We have to have
communities that are willing to
embrace him.
And keep them and get them
involved.
Because as we all know, if, if
they're not embraced by their
community, they're not gonna
stay.
And so we have to change the
narrative is different than when
I started practice.
40 years ago.
It's not the same veterinary
medicine.
And 60.
0.3%.
Of veterinarians that leave a
rural practice, it's because of
work life balance.
They worked too hard.
And they, they want.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
I think it would be helpful to
have my particular description
of.
There's another word for I think
of what a food um animal
veterinarian is, because I think
what you're saying is there's
not going to be a vet who's
gonna deny hair if it's a dog,
but the specialty that what you
really need or you're lacking is
someone who um will take care of
food animals. I mean, that's the
big, that's what you really
want, right? So, uh, it would be
good to have that, uh, you know,
what that means, you know, in
the, in the legisla
ation so I just want to make
that call. Thank you.
So I'm gonna pick up I last up.
I'm gonna pick up a little bit
on Senator Worth and Senator
O'Malley's comments, and I hope
you'll take my suggestion,
Senator, as constructive, um,
because I'm going to propose an
amendment to you.
I think I'll first of all agree
with Senor, we have a problem
with veterinary access
throughout the state in all, in
all sectors. And I realized that
the focus of your bill here is
on rural New Mexico and food,
uh,
animal production. Um, I, I'd
like to amend your bill to make
this available to veterinary
practice across the board and
the selection committee will
decide whether there's an
appropriate demand in rural New
Mexico and for a certain needs
as opposed to others on a case
by case basis because.
You're allowing up to 10
selections every year and in a
short period of time, that could
be quite a few veterinarians
that were bringing to the state
and that's a good thing.
But it strikes me as um that
maybe we're being too
restrictive to Senator
O'Malley's point, if we're
limiting this only to livestock,
um, veterinary services, and,
and maybe expanding it to
others.
I'll, I'll, I'll, uh, I'll give
you, uh, I'll give you a quick
story just to belabor a little
bit of time. Uh, I spent, uh,
Christmas Eve.
And uh one of the veterinary
emergency rooms, uh, went in
about 1 a.m. in the morning and
was there till about uh uh 78
a.m. Christmas morning.
Uh
I'm still married. I can, uh,
it's a, it's a small wonder. We
went to midnight mass. I left
the chocolates for the stockings
on the floor.
pet dogs got into the
chocolates.
Uh, not the gummies, but the but
the chocolates.
And the I see all the groans in
the room, you know.
And I came home and found the
dog he'd gotten in the
chocolates. Uh, I'm fortunate to
have two doctors in the family.
We found the hydrogen peroxide
and we began the process of
trying to have that done
bomb it up.
He stomach and that's how I
spent the first couple of hours
only to get to the emergency
room, um, that you probably
don't need too much graphic
detail, but it was, it was not
the way that I expected to spend
Christmas Eve, uh, or Christmas
morning at all, but, but Jen
Jennifer made it pretty clear
that I didn't get that dog taken
care of and and cured, I should
not come home.
So, um, that's, that's a long
story to say that, that she's
very active with um animal
issues here in, in this city in
particular.
and I'm, I'm surprised by the um
inability of access to spay and
neutering programs, and that's
really where I'm going with all
of this is, I'd like to see
greater access to that, I'd like
to see perhaps consideration in
wording something like this,
doctors who are going to give
up, uh, pro bono services to to
to spay and neutering programs,
and I know Senator Stewart is
very uh good about trying to
work with feral cats, right, in
her neighborhood, so there's a
lot of us that are, that are
very loving of animals.
in all different ways and so
different purposes. I think, I
think there are amendments to
your bill, Senator, that would
assure that we have the right
number of veterinarians in rural
New Mexico to deal with
livestock issues, but also make
it open to recognize we've got a
need for veterinary medicine.
In Santa Fe, I assure you, on
Christmas Eve in particular, uh,
but also I imagine probably in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe as
well, Senator Stewart in
Albuquerque and Ellsworth. I
think it'd be good to, to at
least leave open the option.
Those that are screening the
applicants here to say, hey, we
could use some more
veterinarians in different parts
of the state, so it's a thought
for you, um, I don't know that
we're gonna do the surgery on it
till I get a better sense from
the committee where they would
go with that or you, but, but
tell me what you think about
that center.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, if, if I might just
for a moment, give a, a, a
little bit of an example of, of
where we are, where Senator
Woods and I.
Aiming at with this bill for
many, many years in the
livestock industry of which I'm
50+ years, 5th generation
livestock producer. We all
prided ourselves in in being
able to to be a layman.
Veterinary assistant.
And uh we did a lot of our own
bet work.
And particularly in, in our
area.
There would be one fellow down
the road that that might know
how to do a.
A C-section, a cesarean on a
cow.
Well, whenever we had that need,
we'd call that neighbor and say,
hey Bobby, can you come over
here and.
Help me with this deal. I think
we've got a C-section we're
gonna have to do well, he'd come
over because we had a very.
Limited number of veterinarians
that did that kind of work in
our part of the world. And with
due respect, sir, I mean, I have
a really discrete and narrow
question, which is the sponsor
willing to expand the scope of
this forgiveness, loan
forgiveness program outside of
just rural and, and livestock
related veterinary services.
It's really the question, are
you open to that possibility in
your bill.
That you can answer that or Mr
Senator Woods can answer that,
or?
You all
just give me your genuine take
on it.
Well, you got me over a barrel,
sir.
And you know you got me over a
barrel.
I'm trying my best to
I don't know. Do you remember
how many years I've tried to
bring this bill so far. The last
time I tried to bring this bill
in case y'all don't remember.
I tried to just replace.
The medical repayment bill.
And just add a common ad
veterinary in there.
And I was told that was the
worst.
That was the worst worded
legislation that there ever was.
And I said, all I'm doing is.
OK.
Statute, stretch of law.
And I was told, oh hell no, this
is terrible.
You go the hell back.
Go find something else. Go kick
sand somewhere.
And so
I spent a lot of time trying to
formulate a bill.
For a particular purpose.
I realized we have
A lack of debts everywhere.
I realized that. And I realized
The, the factor.
Of a pet.
To an owner.
I realized that.
I realize how personal that
tragedy is.
But what I'm trying to do with
this bill.
is to fill a particular need.
Because laws have changed.
At one time we could go to a
Arms store
And by several different
Vaccines, several different.
Antibiotics.
The laws have changed. We can't
do that now.
This is all prescription stuff.
You know, probably a good thing.
But the less vets we have,
Unless we can do, can
Being business in the country.
You know, yeah, we can amend
this bill to include all vets
and we can put $100 million in
it.
To do it.
what the focus of this
particular bill is.
It is for my industry.
Trying to get vets out in the
country.
From.
Are you can amend this.
And we can expand it to all
vets.
Take out food animals.
We can, we can take out the
The other language about uh
What is the uh
Uh, particular parts of the
state that we think that needs
to have vets. We can, we can
Open it wide open.
But that, that wasn't actually
the intent of my bill.
Do I, would I rather do that
than lose the bill? Yeah.
I'm at your mercy.
Very much
Because y'all have the power to
pass this bill forward.
And I would have to talk to
chairman.
Good news
And more money.
Right
If we're going to expand it into
more vets, we definitely need
more money. We need probably
more money.
For high end
The
I understand. Do you know
anybody on the finance
committee?
I'm in finance committee.
I might be able to do wonders,
but
Yeah, I'm at your mercy, sir.
At the deal.
The, the, the whole point of the
bill is, as we've explained to
you.
Um, it's not 5 million.
As you know,
Is a limp on the budget that we
have.
Literally a rounding ear.
$5 million.
I'm asking to see if this thing
will work for us.
Is what I'm asking. I'm trying
to get a very specific
If we want to do this to bring
all vets in.
You know, it's the same thing
with all doctors.
We want more doctors too, you
know.
But this particular bill deals
with a very agricultural issue.
And
Um, I'm at your will, sir.
Well, I appreciate you answering
my question. I think you did in
there someplace. Uh, I, I
certainly never want you to feel
over the barrel center or at
anybody's mercy. I'm one guy
with an opinion, um, and uh I
thought I'd throw it out there
too. We, we have loan
forgiveness for.
Any number of different things
so far, right? We do what
teachers and we do nurses, we do
doctors and we do lawyers, um,
on forgiveness here and there,
there may be others I can't
think of in the moment, but I, I
hope this is taken as a, as a
way of me to, to command the
veterinary sciences and the
veterinary medicine, and I
thought we would expand it here
and this may not be the time and
place for you to feel
comfortable going that broad,
but, but I, you're not at my
mercy, sir, you, you've got a
whole committee up here and I
I don't mind standing all by
myself if I'm by myself, but
I'll, I'll wait, wait to see if
anybody else wants to join this
discussion. It, it's a simple
question, which is, do we make
this available to all veterinary
medicine or exclusively as
you've worded here to, food
animal, veterinary medicine, and
I again, I understand, I
understand your resolution and
your intent, and I don't want to
do, I don't want to do too much
harm to your intent. I'm hoping
that we'd make it broader and a
better thing, but.
Uh, I'll, I'll take any other
input from any of the members
who want to join in on that so
and then Senator O'Malley, a
second time, a Senator, uh,
Thornton.
Chairman Senator Woods.
Boone, thank you. Question if
there were more better
veterinarians in the state in
general.
You think the labor market
forces would
Compel folks to to become food
animal veterinarians.
Or, or, or once you start
working on cats and dogs making
good money, you, you never go
out to them.
to the farms.
Let me
I've got 2 vets here.
I won't let them answer that.
I think that Mr. Chair, and uh
Senator Maestta so in committee,
I think the biggest thing to
understand here is that
It is very difficult for
somebody to transition from a
companion or practice into a
rural practice because
experience and relationships are
so important. And what ends up
happening is that
As, as they become ingrained in
a rural community, they stay.
They don't shift.
They don't come out. It's very
limited the opportunities that
are out there in the country
because you, it'd be nice to say
we should have a veterinarian in
Hidalgo County.
It won't support a better name,
period. There's not enough work
in Hidalgo County to support a
veterinary. And so the practices
that serve those areas cover a
large geography.
And the biggest problem with
rural practice right now is that
the workload is too great.
The hours are too long.
For the pay.
And so we have veterinarians
that in rural practice, but will
not stay.
Because of the workload they go
into and there's there's
another.
Um
Can of worms in this, which is
corporate veterinary medicine,
which is a large contributor to
this, that what happens is our
real veterinarians can find out
they can work.
1/3 of the hours and make as
much money. They don't go the
other way.
It just does not. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, gentle,
but, and I don't, I know life's
more complicated than like
blackboard economics, but the
fact that there's a need,
doesn't that create a market
that would increase.
Salaries for, for animal food
animal veterinarians or or just
doesn't work that way.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, the um.
It, it's not merely just the
salary that becomes the
challenge, and I, I think Doctor
Winzel hit on it pretty well
when we had to compete with
corporate practices that offer
benefits and and.
Um, a more enticing life, if you
will, uh, I spent 17 years in
private practice in Carlsbad,
and I covered territory from
Dell City all the way to
Lovington.
And from gel to Roswell.
That's hard to do.
Um, it's, it's hard in one day
to get to more than one ranch.
Maybe too, if you're lucky, if
you can get people to.
To group together, right, so it,
it's, it's not just the salary,
it it really is the way of life.
Thank you, Chairman, and, and
maybe in years to come.
You know, please don't.
Lightning don't strike me, but
we may want to consider, uh,
creating like 150,000
governmental jobs to do this
work.
You know, that's what needs to
happen. But thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator O'Malley
and Senator Thornton. uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um,
You know, I mean, we're, we're,
um, I can understand where,
where, um, senators are coming
from, uh, these, these are huge
areas people have to travel.
Um, and I think that they've
made the point and I think
others have that, um.
You know, if we open it up.
Really, I think that we would
You know, why we might, uh, you
know, create more opportunities
for veterans, veterinarians, um,
you know, they would probably
choose to work in more of an
urban area where there is more
income, um,
And so I, I think that's why
there's this focus on food
animals and in particular rural
areas and also
You know, uh,
There's, uh, you know, someone
just mentioned that there's
several generations of farmer, I
mean a ranchers. This is also an
opportunity maybe for family to,
to who's they're interested in
in veterinary medicine to maybe,
you know, have an opportunity
there to to stay and um cause
this is clearly this is not easy
work.
And so I think that's one of the
reasons why, you know, you're
really focused on that. So I,
I'll just be honest, I think
that to keep that as a
As a preference, um, I think
it's important.
Uh, that we, we, we keep it a
preference for.
Or uh food animal veterinarians.
Thank you, Senator Turner.
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you very
much for your presentation. I, I
appreciate that.
The issue that we're trying to
address here, and I, and I agree
with you that we ought to focus
specifically on that. I just had
one question with regards to,
you had mentioned that there.
3.6% of all US veterinarians are
food animal veterinarians.
How many does that actually?
Result in in New Mexico, with
the 5th largest state
geographically.
the nation.
Have a lot of area to cover. So
how many actual food?
Veterinarians do we have in New
Mexico as of today? Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and, and Senator
Thornton, uh, that's a, a
difficult number to assess,
actually, I reviewed our
database and I can tell you that
on file we have over 200
veterinarians who are certified
to TB and and trick test, and
that gives me a ballpark, but
when I start to look at that
list closely.
I see veterinarians who are
deceased.
Who are retired or in the
process of retiring
veterinarians such as myself who
are regulatory and who not are
not out working in the field on
a regular basis.
So that becomes it shrinks quite
quickly, um, but I would be
happy to pull those numbers
together for you.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Doctors per geographic mile or
Per square acre or whatever it
is that we need to understand
the the distribution of these
doctors as well, if they're
located in the major cities,
obviously that's
Not gonna resolve the issue. And
so, so it would be helpful to
understand what the, what the
real demographics are and where
they're located, but I support
this bill, so I, I understand
what you're trying to achieve.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Is there
anyone else on the list?
Center. So Mr. Chair, it seems
like there's a way to do both.
I mean, you're looking for a
specific program with $5 million
in it.
I, I mean, the real question
comes down to exactly what you
said. If we can go talk to the
Senate Finance Committee and
They're willing to put up
$10 million and then there's
some language that says 50% of
that's gonna go for this program
and 50% of it goes for vets in
the other state, doesn't that
get us?
And in that win-win for
everybody.
Yes, it is a win-win.
I agree with you. I, I agree we
need more vets, but we need
We need this so much to support
my industry.
You know, we can amend this bill
or we can.
Draft another bill.
Totally and and make a
substitute bill because there's
gonna be a huge amount of change
in here.
If we do it
Any other way.
So, you know
We're, we're talking about the
areas these things these people
serve in different things that
will have to be changed.
To, to just, you know, carte
blanc.
Make it a different deal.
Um
I can look at that for you.
To see if we want to bring
another bill forward.
To do that or
Amend this one it's gonna be a
lot of the mending in this bill.
On the fly
So, Mr. Chair, I'm not
suggesting we're doing anything
on the fly.
Let me be clear. I mean, it just
feels to me though, I mean, I
get what you're saying, and we
do have programs that are
targeted to rural areas, we do
it with doctors. You know, we're
trying to encourage a certain
thing to happen here.
But I think what you've done and
again you've been working on
this issue, you've opened up.
An area where there's such need.
It just feels to me like there's
a way to do both here.
You know, and again, and I, I,
I'm not talking about
You know, changing the bill and
then.
You know, leaving the $5 million
in there, so it doesn't work
proportionately, I'm just when I
was looking at this, I'm sitting
there going, OK, I get it.
So if we got a fund that's got
$10 million in and half goes to
the rural and half goes for the
rest of the state or wherever it
gets done. And I don't think you
need a new bill.
I think it just, we just need to
come up with some potentially
some language that does that,
that'll work for everyone, and
then we need to go visit with
the finance committee because
clearly this is, you've touched
on something that I, I did not
know the chair's story, but all
of us, you know, sitting at 6
o'clock in the morning to get
the dog into the, into the vet
cause the line is that long. I
mean, that's, that's what we're
hearing.
And, and I don't have, I've got
some small pockets, but nothing
like what you all are dealing
with, but I think that's there.
So I just would throw that out,
Mr. Chair. It feels like there's
a solution here. It's an
important deal and I don't, I
think if we just amend the bill
and open it up, then the problem
is you're really going to lose
the whole purpose that you're
trying to do. I tend to agree
with Senator O'Malley. I think
that
The purpose here makes sense to
me.
But I think there's a way to do
both, so just maybe I've got my
uh
My mediator hat on here because
I'm just hearing a solution
here.
doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, so I,
I also agree with with Senator
O'Malley. Uh, I, I probably
would not support this
amendment.
Um
Because I
It sounds like there really is a
specific
A specific problem you're
looking to solve with this. Um,
and
That
And, and, and, and I'm sure
Senator Worth is very good at
coming up with, with good
solutions on things. So, uh, I,
I certainly would not wanna rule
that out as, as an option. Um,
But just
As you're, uh, figuring out your
vote count on the amendment. I
wanted to, to make sure you had
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think I have a good idea of
the temperature of the
committee, that's part of my job
too. So, Senator, not quite over
the barrel you thought you were.
I, I, I tend to agree with
Senator Wirth that we're calling
this bill new material, new act,
the veterinary medical loan
repayment Act. So it's not
exclusive to just
Uh, you know, uh, the food
animal, veterinary science. So
if you were gonna do a new bill,
that's come up with a new name
for a new act that would
distinguish it from this, and
this is kind of broad and
encompassing so they could be
too hard to do that as a
separate bill. I don't think
that probably works, you would
have to roll into this one, I
think, and um the the amendments
would not be substantial, but I
think that you have uh votes to
pass the bill with your intent,
intact without uh opening this
to vent.
engineering, uh, services other
than that, I think it's
important to just note the need
and so
sure. Could you give me just 2
minutes to confer with a bunch
up here.
Sure, we can do that, uh,
Senator. Uh, I will, I will tell
you what, what my amendment
would look like if, if you have
just a moment. Uh, you would
simply on the second page have
to take out the word food
animal.
Uh, you're already defining what
a recipient is on page 2,
recipients broad enough, it
already says, says any
veterinarian selected to
participate.
I would note for you on page 3.
The selection committees on line
13, your, your selection
committee is gonna be the state
veterinarian in Mexico State
Extension veterinarian and chair
of the board of veterinarian
medicine, that those three
people may decide it all needs
to go to rule and food animals,
they may decide at all, they
have the ultimate control side
who gets it.
Uh, you'd want to, you'd want on
page 3, you'd want to strike
lines 21 and 22.
Which means that you have, you'd
have to make the selection based
on on designation of food, food
animal veterinarian, and then on
page 4, you'd have to take out
the word food food animal on
line 8.
Um, so I, I don't think the
would be extensive to probably
make them and get them back to
you at the next meeting, but I
also respect the majority of the
will of the committee, and I'm,
I'm telling you, I hear a couple
of members saying they're,
they're OK with taking it the
way you've got it, so, um, you
confer and let me know what you
want to do.
I'm waiting for the cat lady to
Um, Mr. Chair.
We're, we're back in order,
Senator Woods.
I, uh.
I wonder if we could just uh
create more witchy scholarships
and take care of that.
How would you like, I'm, I'm not
following you, what do you want
to do over there? What was that
meeting about what? Well, um,
I'm not we only have uh 10 which
scholarships, uh, with other
universities.
And we have those are.
For different things, but one of
them is for vet schools.
Maybe
The solution to the problem
you're talking about.
is increasing the scholarship.
Instead of
Messing with this bill.
I could bring a bill back to you
and try to increase those
scholarships.
It, uh,
I don't know what that
negotiation would be and we will
have to confer with our head on
that.
Uh, because that's a multi-state
negotiation.
But that might be a solution to
both of our problems.
The negotiator in me, Mr. Chair.
Well, I, I, I look forward to
being there and you've got the
meat eater in chief over here to
my right hand side, but, but
what I hear you to be saying
after conferring, you want to
roll with your bill as it is.
All right, very good. And um I'm
not seeing any change in the
temperature of the room or or
appetite for amendment, um,
unless I missed something, so
I'm not gonna propose an
amendment unless I see greater
support and I don't see it. So
we just Mr. Chair, if you do.
Introduce a new bill.
We'll make sure it gets referred
to these two committees.
And again, I think there should
be a commitment that will move
that quickly, given that he's
pivoting, so you're not.
Stuck, in other words, just
think.
We, we'll roll to the judiciary
and finance, just the two
committees and
And then I think we'll look at
it and figure out what it looks
like.
Yeah, I, I'm great, I appreciate
it. I, I think again, given the
title of this bill in the
veterinary medicine loan
repayment, if we ever want to do
a loan repayment for
veterinarians, it's gonna be
this bill, where you're gonna be
back here man this down the
road, I think, unless we, again,
I can't think of how you come up
with another veterinary
repayment loan program. Butt,
we're, where we're at, we're on,
we're on a motion, waiting for a
motion. Senator Stewart and then
Senator Louisville won't cut off
the debate. We'll wait for a
moment.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, I don't
want to, uh,
throw water on this, but
Don't think that we can do a
bill just to increase the
witchy.
Uh
Scholarships. It's a multi-state
issue. It's controlled by a
multi-state board, uh, Senator
Bill Souls is our person on
whichy. So, uh, we would have to
talk to him about it, but
I think if we could have just
increased which she uh
scholarships ourselves, we would
have done it a long time ago.
Um, so I'm just warning the
senator that I don't think that
that is a solution.
But no, we talk to Bill Souls.
He'll know more about how it
really works.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, thank
you, Senator.
That's just going to move a do
pass do pass motions or any
other debate?
Is there, uh, any objection to
the Du pass motion.
Sing them after all that, so,
you've got to do pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can I, can
I tell you a quick story.
I want to know what it feels
like to not be over the barrel.
The, uh,
my granddaughter has been
working as a vet assistant for 3
years.
And she was accepted out of vet
school this year.
But one of the most amazing
things that happened to her.
was we talked about other
species.
The zoo at Clovis.
Brought an alligator here agenda
to do an autopsy.
Well, it was a dead alligator
and they got busy and they
started pushing that alligator
over here and pushing that
alligator over there and.
Finally, the vet said, well,
let's get this autopsy over, but
before we do, we'll get you some
hot water and pour on that
alligator's head.
It poured hot water on that
alligator's head, and he came
alive.
Two days later.
Two days later, they brought the
alligator back.
It's it. Now for sure, he's dead
this time.
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm ready to
start on.
Senate Bill 182.
You want to wait for
You'll have up to 10 minutes for
advocacy. And then we have,
well, one registered opponent,
uh, in opposition, and she'll
have up to 10 minutes. I don't
imagine she'll need all of that
time, but, uh, Kelly Stout
Sanchez has registered in
opposition.
And we'll hear you now, Senator.
I, I hope you'll be mindful of
my desire commitment to
committee to try and be done
with this in about 30 minutes,
right? OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, the title of this bill of
Senate Bill 182 is related to
public liability establishing
coverage limits on insurance
covered, offered by risk
management De Vision of the
General Service to department.
And if you will notice on this
particular
Bell, other than some, some.
Minor changes to wordage, the
major change is on page 2.
And uh we have an amendment, Mr.
Chair. I, I don't know. I hope
you have it.
The amendment
Uh, I would like to propose
right now if that would be OK.
Do you have that? We do, yes.
Uh, I propose amendment to the
Senate Judiciary Committee the
following amendment on Senate
Bill 182 on page 2, line 1
through 3 strike item 1 in its
entirety and then renumbering
the items accordingly. And
Uh
That, let me explain the
amendment real quick.
Um,
We found that the coverage of
50 500,000 for property damages
may be unrealistic.
Because we have some huge
buildings, we have prisons, we
have different things in the
state and just to say we're not
going to spend any more than
that. We can't really justify
that. So I would like just to
mend that out of the bill, that
part of it.
Is there any objection to
adoption of that amendment?
It's adopted. The amendments
adopted. OK, then the rest of
it, um, let's just start pick up
right there on page 2 line 3
where it says 100.
$150,000 for general liability
insurance.
That is the statutory liability
cap in our tort Claims Act is
where we got that from.
The number 3, the limits
established in Section 1,
Section 41 4A-6 is the civil
liability, civil rights
liability.
And that's actually the caps
that show up in that, which is 2
million plus inflation. It's
inflationary deal that goes on
there.
And
Mr. Chair, um,
The, the background of this is,
well, let me just, uh,
Mella is is my expert witness.
Let me just get, let her explain
kind of the background of this
real quickly if I could, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Woods. I'm Mikaela
Fisher. I'm a deputy director at
the LFC. I oversee the program
evaluation unit there. Um, our
unit did uh evaluation on the
state's risk management funds,
about 2 years ago at this point,
um, and found what a lot of
people know that the
self-insurance fund that the
state runs at the General
Services department where they,
they charge rates to agencies to
help cover settlement and other
liability costs. It's, it's
really it's not in the red, but
it's getting there.
um, because of the amount of
settlements and judgments coming
against the state, um, the
state's liable to pay out, so.
We, as part of that evaluation,
looked to see what other states
were doing, you know, what, what
could be done to help, you know,
even out the cost to this fund
and also to
Um
The rates charged to agencies,
you know, while still making
sure that the state, you know,
we didn't change any liability
for the state making it more or
less liable for any um offenses
it may cause against people, um,
and one of the uh strategies we
Saw from other states was other
states don't provide unlimited
coverage for liability, um,
insurance. They will cover up to
their own state's Tort Claims
Act, and then if, say, um,
there's a federal civil rights
judgment against the state for
over that cap, then it's
it's incumbent on the agency to
come in front of the legislature
and say, you know, I, I need, I
need the rest of this money. I
need you to appropriate it and
so this is really an
accountability and transparency
bill to make sure that state
agencies.
um,
are hiding behind the risk funds
in paying out some of these
costs when they've been found or
um settled cases for civil
rights violations. Um, I've got
a lot of numbers here about the
position of the fund, um, the
budgetary bill. I'm happy to
answer any questions you might
have and um thanks to the
senator for carrying the bill.
Mr. Chairman.
I would like to leave you with
this.
Bit of information that you know
already.
A constitution says.
That the legislator appropriates
money.
When we leave things wide open.
And all of a sudden.
They come to us and say we need
to.
Barry bar in our.
Our particular budget to pay for
a large settlement.
We do not have the power to stop
that bar.
All we're asking in this bill
when it gets right down to it.
It is for them to come to back
to legislative finance.
Mitty, when the legislature's
not in session.
Or come to the session to the to
the legislators when they are in
session and say we've got this
settlement we have to pay for.
So that we will know.
How to do that.
You are trusting us to.
Budget
For the state.
That's one thing you're trusting
us to do.
And we're trying to do that and
with this particular bill we can
more likely budget, correct?
Right now, just so you know.
We've got a special fund set up.
With $20 million in it.
And there's a proposal this year
to put 17 more million in it.
But the outstanding
Liability the state has today.
It's 340 million.
Now let that thing sink in a
minute.
Let that sink in. Now this is
not a one time right day
tomorrow. It is a deal that
after it goes through the
The hoops.
This is the possibility we'll be
liable for this kind of money.
So what I'm asking you today.
Is to, yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm
wanting to
Get my hands around this.
Not a choke hold.
But I'm asking.
The agency
To come in to you.
And say we have problems we need
this settlement.
And that will give you the
opportunity to question them.
As to
What are we doing wrong when
we're violating someone's civil
right.
How can we chain our people
better so we won't do that.
We can't limit federal civil
act.
I want you to know that we
cannot limit those.
That's in statute. We, that's
federal law. We can't do
anything about that. There's
some analysis here that says, oh
my God.
Federal civil right we can't do
anything about that, but we can
get that agencies to come to us.
And say, we've got these claims,
and this is the cause of those
claims.
Now what can we do as a
legislature to help.
Not violate someone's civil
rights.
How can we train our people
better. That's what we want to
ask the agency. Right now, the
agency trust General Services
Department to pay these.
They just, they're general
services you fail.
So Mr. Chair.
As you can tell, I'm trying to
practice law. I apologize, sir.
It's not my, it's not my forte
as you know.
So
It's going to say a case, but I
don't.
I'll be quick, I promise.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
My name's Kelly Stout Sanchez,
I'm a lawyer in Albuquerque and
I do a lot of work, um, on
behalf of children who have been
physically and sexually abused
and so a lot of my cases are
against uh CYFD against schools
against governmental agencies.
Um,
Just to take a quick step back.
But the concern is regarding
this bill. We're talking about.
The most egregious and serious
of cases against the state we're
talking about.
Children who are in foster care
who get killed when they are
placed in dangerous.
Those are the types of.
Federal civil rights violations
that we are talking.
with the worst misconduct and
the worst damages.
Um, and so, um, the concern with
with this bill, um, is.
That tying um in tying the uh
potential settlement of these
very serious claims to an
appropriation um by the
legislature, um, or the budget
of an agency and whether they
have that in their budget, that
that creates a lot of
uncertainty.
And as many um as chairman and
many of the members of this
committee know, one of the
important purposes of settlement
for both parties is is finality.
I resolution is certainty.
And, and in recognizing that and
so with uncertainty in terms of
whether the legislature is going
to an approve and appropriation
and approve a settlement.
That is going to result in
increased litigation costs
because the parties are not
gonna have.
Um, any incentive or motivation
to settle because there is not
that element of certainty.
Um, there's gonna be more costs
that the state's gonna have to
expend in defending these cases
or trials, um, and that's,
that's really the concern here,
particularly when we're talking
about these very serious cases,
um, and so while very much
appreciate Senator Wood's goals
here for accountability and
transparency and absolutely
agree that these agencies should
come forward and explain what
they are doing, um, the concern
is that tying that.
To to settlements of these very
high, um, and serious uh claims,
um, will, will result in um in a
lot more though.
Thank you, thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
So I have a lot of heartburn
about the spell.
Um
I think there is a fundamental
separation of powers issue with
this, uh, both with the
executive and potentially with
the judiciary, um, we have the
executive is the risk management
is, is making these
determinations and we are
essentially saying you back.
For anything that that is
exceeding these amounts you have
to come say, Mother, may I, to,
to the legislature. Um, I think
that is a separation of powers
issue. Um, I think to the extent
that if this was, was a, a
federal civil rights claim, and,
and there's a verdict, uh, that
then can't be satisfied because
of this, and you again, would
have to come to the legislature
to say, Mother, may I, to pay
this verdict that has has
already happened. That's a
separation of powers issue. Um,
And if you come say, Mother, may
I am, we say no.
You're still the, the, the
agency is still responsible.
For that verdict. So it's
potentially crippled.
that because they still have to
pay.
What has been ordered by the
court or or or or deemed by a
jury, um, but they don't have
any insurance coverage.
To pay it with. And so we
Do they spend their entire
budget?
On that, um, and then they
cannot no longer provide those
services. Um, I,
As, as Miss Stout said, uh, uh,
I, I absolutely admire the, the
intention for, for
accountability, for
transparency, and we should
definitely be having those
conversations with all of our
agencies about why is this
happening? Why do you have
these, these claims against you,
um, and why have you created
this liability and what are you
doing to fix that and make sure
it never happens again.
But I don't think this.
This is what gets us there, and
I think this creates a lot of
problems, uh, in trying to get
to that place. Um,
I'm just, I'm picturing.
When we have a, a jury and
You have a 12 of your peers and,
and it is hard enough for 12
people.
To look at a complicated
situation.
And, and figure out what should
be done. We would be asking
potentially 112.
We'll be asking the entire
legislature to second guess and
pass their judgment on a case
that where we probably had very,
very little.
Information. Um, and we're
coming in after the.
So, Mr. Chair, I
Regrettably can't, uh, support
this bill.
11 other consideration is if
it's coming to the legislature
to approve these things.
Then, then we are the ones on,
on the political hook.
Or for something that
Really does not involve us.
Otherwise, um,
Including potentially crippling
our own agencies.
When we don't think, uh.
An additional appropriation
would be appropriate uh to cover
that way.
So
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see
this completely different, not
just as a public transparency.
But as a legislative
transparency because unless you
sit on Senate Finance and have
risk management come before you
and present on the amount of
outstanding liabilities. Many
legislators have no idea how
much money we owe and who we owe
it to, and, and the reality is
who the repeat offenders are who
these settlements are, right? I
think that legislators.
Are owed the information to know
which one of our agencies.
I'm, I'm sure there's several
cases with all of them continue
to be repeat offenders and
violating people's.
They were rights and what we're
gonna do about it, but until
it's transparent and becomes
becomes not just to the public
but to all legislators we don't
even recognize where the problem
is.
The reality is, is we're gonna
have to fund the payouts.
We're gonna have to fund the
payout, but if you're, you're
all you're doing is adding a cap
over here that over a certain
amount.
Legislators, the legislative
body needs to be aware of that
and how much it is.
I see this is just, just uh, you
know, flexing the legislative
authority as the appropriators
as you said and just complete
transparency, not just with the
with the public, but I would
venture that mass majority of
legislators have no idea who,
who our bad apples are, um, and
this is the first way that we
begin to kind of push back and
and making sure that we are
addressing those concerns, so we
don't have major payouts. Uh,
thank, thank you for bringing it
forward.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and I think that Senator um Duha
explained it very well. I mean,
we don't want to be in this
business, right? I mean, and,
and I don't think it's
appropriate for us to do that.
Um, I, I also think though that
this brings up the issue yet
again because when we heard from
Mexico counties we're talking
about, you know, their concerns
about, um, you know, liability
and the fact that, you know,
they're, they're concerned about
how they're gonna
Pay for some of these things in
the future, and I think, um, Mr.
Chair, you brought up some ideas
about how to deal with that.
Um
I think that's, that's a
concern, uh, not only for, for
the state, but also for some of
these counties is smaller
counties, so there's something
that we will have to deal with,
I think in the future, but, um,
I don't believe this is the the
way to handle it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
So, uh, Senator, I've had the
unique privilege of representing
uh RMD in the past as an
attorney, when I did defense
work, I was a contract attorney
with the state back then when I
became a legislator, I thought
there would be a conflict of
interest in me representing the
state as its lawyer, um, I did
enjoy, I think I've told members
representing former Governor
Martinez, uh, as her attorney in
employment case when I did so,
but I thought that I thought the
conflict between me being a
senator and that should
discontin.
So I, I, uh, let that contract
go and, and, and since then I've
had a judgment against.
The state, namely UNM Hospital.
Uh, for a medical malpractice
case.
The jury thought the damages
that should be paid by UNim
Hospital where were $4 million.
Uh, the tort claims.
Cap operated.
Which meant that although the
jury thought the damages that
were due to the family for that
claim should be $4 million. Our,
our law here knocked that down
to $750,000 just because we have
that cap.
I, I, I go here because there's
a narrative going around this
state, that New Mexico's
plaintiff friendly or lawsuit
crazy or, you know, verdicts are
on nuclear, I guess was the word
that was used the other day in a
conversation I was with, um.
What's interesting to me about
your bill is that that you're
tying this bill to what our caps
of the Tort Claims Act.
And do you know, do you know
Senator, you go, when do we,
when did we last raise the caps
on the tort claims Act.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, uh,
I'm not sure about the general
liability one, the civil rights
liability cap, I think was 3 or
4 years ago and it creases every
year with inflation. Yeah, tell
me, look at the history real
quick? Does anybody know last
time we increased the caps, and
Brandon's gonna look while I
keep talking. Um, Mr. Chair,
I've got the statute in front of
me and it looks like.
It was amended in '91, 2004 and
2007.
2007 is one worth it on
property, right? Yeah, but what
about general liability? When
was the last time general
liability was raised?
It might have been 91, sir, I
don't have the I have the note
the dates 91, my math, so.
We're talking about here?
Maybe almost 34 years.
Is that is that my math right?
Cowboys were winning.
What's that? 30, is that 35
years, Senator Stewart?
Think about that, folks, we
haven't raised the cap.
In this state that's running
rampant with plaintiffs' lawyers
and big verdicts. We haven't
raised the cap on which this on
what the state will pay for
general liability in almost 35
years.
What do you all know that hasn't
gone up in 35 years.
Uh,
well, you know something center
that hadn't gone up in 35 years.
Yeah, who, who raises those
caps? Well, that's, that's a
different question. I'll I'll,
I'll, I'll give you that moment
in a second. We do, but we
haven't. What, sir?
We're on the bill. What's that?
On a bill.
You're gonna support me on that?
If you pass this also support
you.
No,
no,
well, I'll tell you what, I'll
tell you what. We'll roll this
over, we'll come back next
meeting, I'll have an amendment
to this bill to raise the caps
on the Tort Claves Act, but,
you know, that, uh, again, I, I,
I'm so troubled by this
narrative.
But this place is run by trial
lawyers and plaintiffs lawyers,
we have not raised the cap on
what the state will pay.
For a general liability claim in
almost 35 years.
It's unconscionable to me that
we're, that we have that, and
yet this narrative that that
plaintiff's lawyers are running
rampant around this place. And,
and that's what, that's what's
moving up, think New Mexico and
all the other propaganda, uh,
tort reform needed and so forth.
It's, it's, I've made my point,
but, but I, I, I wanted to, I
wanted to note a couple of
questions for you sincerely.
Because you're tying this to
the, to the, you said Tort
Claims Act, so here's an
example.
Again, this notion that New
Mexico's rampant with, with
plaintiff slurs.
The New Mexico caps the Civil
Rights Act.
But as you know, we learned at
our last meeting, if you so to
the federal law.
Not governed by us, but by all
those folks in DC who are
learned and professionals and
modern and professionalized
legislature. Let's go
professionalize Congress, they,
they don't have any caps at all.
Right? And we do some pretty
strict caps. Civil rights, $2
million. Some folks may think,
and I agree that's a lot of
money, but the feds say
unlimited. Now, here's the
problem with your bill.
If I sue as a lawyer under the
federal to, uh, as for a federal
claim, civil rights, and I get
an $8 million judgment.
Las Cruces just paid $20 million
to settle one.
Uh, you're, you're Bill says
that they're only insuring them
under the state for the first
million.
$50,000 right? And everything
else has got to come back to the
legislature, and what are you
gonna do? You're gonna come back
up here and say, no, we ain't
gonna pay it.
It ain't that ain't gonna work.
No, sir. You know the way I see
this work. What, what you're
saying is
I, I'm thinking, I don't want to
put words in your mouth.
Right now
General Service Department.
Does reinsure.
And tries to cover more.
More than what the state
liability is under statute.
I don't know that we gave them
that authority to do that.
But I'm sure that that's what
they're doing. I talked to Anna
outside a while ago, and that's
essentially what they do. But
what I'm saying is,
Even with that,
We, we can't get a, a grasp of
this. We can't, we can't budget
this. We can't.
We can't, you know, you're
saying it's not fair to come say
to the state mother, may I?
And yet it's a state employee or
the state agency that is sued.
And we need to correct that.
If our agencies are doing wrong.
Why wouldn't we want to correct
that?
Why wouldn't we want to make
that obvious.
By the newspaper saying, you've
got this big claim, the state
had to come together and, and
pay this big claim.
I wouldn't make it obvious that
we're at fault.
And we
Right now,
As you know, sir, we're flush
with money.
And we can pay big claims.
All I'm asking in this bill.
Is that.
That one there's a big claim.
It's transparent.
And it brought forward.
And I'm assuming you guys are
the attorneys. I'm not, but I'm
assuming if a court has a claim
on us, we have to pay it.
Until we are, you know, we can
go through an appeals process or
whatever, but essentially, the
state is liable for that claim.
You're saying, well, we could
get an insurance to pay for it
instead of us.
But what do you think our
insurance rates is when we have
$3070 million of outstanding
liability.
It's not cheap
And it could be a point in time.
When it's cheaper to cash.
Ensure the deal and to buy the
policy.
So
I understand your arguments.
Mm
But the transparency and
accountability that this will
bring.
Is something that we need to
think about.
As far as the New Mexico caps.
Raising them things if you need
to. Hold on a second, say that
again. What? Raise them if you
need to do it.
I don't, I, I understand.
I run cows and you guys run
something else, OK?
I don't understand your
business.
But you understand your business
well enough to know, I, I would
never support a unlimited, but I
wouldn't support a cat.
If this cap is way off the
necessary deal, then we can buy
insurance.
For the caps.
That's the way we budget.
That's black and white. We can
do that.
But we can't just be wild, wide
open. We can never budget for
it.
It's my problem.
I understand, I understand you
and I appreciate and respect and
agree with you, your goals, and
I really do. And one thing that
I think we can do because I've
heard from you and others, the
importance of transparency, and
I'm certainly all about that
too. You, you'll note that for
many years, GST would not
reveal, and I see her nodding
affirmatively. GSD would not
reveal the settle settlements,
not to the public, not to the
lawyers, not to the courts,
right? They wanted to keep all
that stuff under wraps.
Um, and so the secret was our
own government.
Not wanting the public to know
what's going on, but if you're,
if your goal here is
transparency, I'm all for it, in
fact, what I'll do, I'll
schedule here and come up here
before too long, but we'll ask
GST to come in and tell us their
claims history, and we'll do
that next week, right? And
they'll, hopefully, they'll tell
us what late cases they've
settled and for how much and
what sectors, so you get an
answer to your question is, why
are we paying these claims and
and to who, right? And I, I,
they have that report publicly,
don't you usually publish that
every year? Mr. Chair.
Yes, and I will, I will say
there's another LFC endorsed
bill that is coming to your
committee, Senate Bill 220 that
does establish in statute GSD's
requirement to continue
publishing settlements on the
Sunshine Portal. Right now
they're doing it.
Out of their good graces, um,
you know, and it also has
Um, some provisions for risk
management to come in after a
big settlement happens to come
in and do an after the fact
report and say, you know, what
happened here? How are we're
gonna make sure this doesn't
happen again. So they're really
two companion bills. Uh, my
colleague Joey Simon, who's the
analyst for GSD LF you just
mentioned to me that risk
management is going to be up in
front of Senate Finance on
Wednesday. I'm talking about
some of this as well. Well, not
all the good stuff happens over
there. We'll bring you over here
right after that. I'll try and
team up with it, yeah, I just
got handed the bill, and I, I
appreciate it, but you said it.
You all are doing it out of your
good graces, right? But let's be
honest about that trial lawyers
had to fight and fight and fight
for years because GST would not
reveal the settlements, right?
And how do we get any better,
Senator? How do we, how do we,
uh, how do we improve when they
and I and I you know I've been
on the other side, I told you,
the, the defense doesn't want
those numbers out there because
they believe that's that's the,
the bar and the limit for
everybody else, and that's a
good argument. That's not,
that's not unreasonable. It's
not illogical.
Uh, at the same time, also good
arguments on on the other side
of the public, you should know
as a budgeter, right? And we
should all know, the public
should know. So anyway, we're a
little bit off the field of your
bill. My, my concern is only
that, if you, if you limit the
insurance amount that there that
then somebody like Senator
Worth,
Senor, probably one of the best
mediators in the state. He
settles cases all day long.
But, but I'll tell you what a
good meter does, they wait till
they see the whites of their
eyes, the old expression, right?
He, he settles cases on the
courthouse steps. I've seen them
settle cases in the middle of a
trial.
Uh, it's hard to do that when
you say we're gonna settle it
for this, but it's gonna be
maybe up to the legislature to
approve it, and you just said,
well, of course, we're gonna
approve it. Well, if it's a
rubber stamp, and what's the
point?
If, if you're going to prove
that son won't pay it anyway.
What's the point of having you
all review it as a, as a
preconditional. I hope that
makes some sense to you. I, I,
I'm not getting that.
Yeah, and I, I understand that
respectfully, Mr. Chair. I just
Couple order of operations here
for the for the bill. It in a
civil rights case, which would
be the one that went over the
claim because the federal
doesn't cap damages, um.
The state would still be able to
pay out up to the civil rights
Act, which is 2.3 million, I
think this year increases every
year for inflation. So say there
was a settlement for $4 million
there's a recent one against
CYFD.
They would be able to pay out
that 2.5 right away from the
fund because they are due paying
agency. What would happen is the
remainder, they would have to
come to the legislature probably
as part of an appropriations
hearing and explain what
happened in a transparent way.
It wouldn't just automatically
all come out of the fund. And I,
I will say,
Even now, it doesn't even come
all the way out of the fund. The
agency management has to ask for
a bar to increase their budget
authority, so there's already
some padding of time in there.
And there's also, this isn't
necessarily unprecedented. I, I
think, what was it? 2 years ago,
last year we the the the
Appropriations Committee, the
legislature approved some
payments for the Secretary of
State. They had a settlement
that was outside of risk
management. They said, you know,
we have these costs that came to
the appropriations Committee
said we need this as part of a
special legislature granted it
to him. Um, so it, it's not to
that level of cost, but it's not
unprecedented either. So yeah.
And, and thank you, so that's
answering my questions. I
appreciate it very much. Um, I,
I totally try and work some
time, so, uh, members of the
any others that may have been
provoked by the discussion.
discussion
Emotions
They're doing on a motion, uh,
make a motion to table, Mr.
Chair.
is a motion to table is, it's a
non-debatable for the new
members. We don't debate tabling
motions and by rule.
Um
Said O'Malley, you wish to wait
on this, you want to be on this
vote?
The motion is to table it's a
non-debatable motion. Is there
any objection to the tabling
motion.
Singing none show all members in
support. Senator, your bill is
tabled.
Not bad for a day though.
50% of this committee is pretty
damn good.
One more than I got last year.
Oh.
So I will see you, uh, would
everybody please remember that
we're going to be gathering
tomorrow evening and some
extraordinary work being at
6:30, uh, we'll see you there
tomorrow night. Thank you.
