I was referred to judiciary this
morning I believe family has a
substitutes and pursuant to the
need to follow I'd like a motion
to adopt that substitute for
discussion purposes only today
what that'll do is allow it to
be posted online and then
whenever you decide to hear
Senate bill five thirteen all
the agencies and the public will
have a chance to see what the
substitute bill actually does Mr
this time.
I do not pass on Senate bill
five thirteen and pass on the.
Special purposes.
Merriman wealth maybe no
objection that motion carries
five thirteen is known the
Judiciary Committee as a
committee substitute thank you
so Representative thank you
senator Wirth thank you.
Sen bill for for some time and
we'll get you over to finance.
Have a simple bill to.
US.
Eighty three is here.
This was.
Looking for the what I think
will be quick.
Senator Kernan years is not
quick but.
You think you think it is let's
uh.
What's to Senate will do Senator
agree with Sierra first and then
we'll get two years next Madam
very quickly Sir.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
Senate Bill at.
Eighty three
Introducing the this is the
statute today because our
telephone Billings practice need
to be modernized make sure New
Mexico customers can benefit
from all the convenience choices
and lower prices that are
available to in other states.
the statues and acting.
In nineteen ninety nine when
wireless telephone service was
still in its early stages that
was back when the so called
second generation of wireless to
G. as it was known people use
flip phones there were used
exclusively to make telephone
calls.
I can remember back in the
fifties having a party line you
pick up the phone there's
somebody talking on.
So that was way before.
To G. and one G. since we are
progressing to the fifth
generation wireless service and
most of us have smartphones with
screen displays and lots of apps
today voice is just one of many
services to which our phones
give us access we also use them
to watch videos listen to music.
Play video games and much more
Representative some of the
buildings Center.
Modernizes the.
Thank you bye enabling consumers
to authorize charges for north
telecommunication services on
their telephone bills.
When authorize charges would
continue to be illegal and
subject to enforce it by the
PRC.
So that the summarizes and then
I have Michael Sanchez.
Just a brief some brief comments
thank you Mr chairman senator
Clemente the original telephone
building statues over twenty
four four years old today what
that statue prevents those
charges on phone bills for non
telecommunication services even
when customers authorized the
surface and so we're just trying
to modernize the the billing
statute to allow for non
telecommunications services to
be charged to phone bills only
if authorized by the customer
and consumers and any and an
authorized charges would of
course leave PRC would have the
power to investigate and to
penalize those violations I want
to be brief but I will refer you
to the fiscal impact report we
did receive responses from the
PRC also the Attorney General
who stood in support of this
agreeing that the statue just
needs to be modernized I really
to keep up with technology and
we do have an expert here if we
need to go any further but I
think right now the stand for
questions going to introduce
yourself to serve thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
the old work Legislative Council
for Verizon for the south region
which includes New Mexico thank
you very much.
We don't have anyone registered
in opposition to the bill we
have to proponents are
registered Robert The New Mexico
with eighteen to you yes Sir are
your us one minute Sir please
there's not there's no
opposition to know if you can
you were going to say something
will give you up to a minute.
Is
this.
Thank you.
Hold.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee about
Technavio representing eighteen
T. New Mexico here in support of
Senate bill eighty three we
think this bill creates the
right policy for New Mexico in
terms of our customers getting
services and convenience of
putting it on their bill we
appreciate the Sanchez bringing
this and we ask you to a past
this bill we think it's good for
the state thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you also
registered in advance is Lisa
McCabe issues by zoom zoom again
are you
of there for us.
Mr chair just after on the.
Sorry yes after on the miss
McCabe your mood your muted.
Yes members of the committee
yeah we can hear you recognize a
probe to minute miss McCabe.
Thank you.
Hi my name is Lisa McCabe and
I'm here on behalf of PTI the
trade association for the
wireless communications industry
in support of.
Three.
The bill of the Kanata north the
thank you to take a count of the
changes in health.
Over the last.
And in the bill
allow in fact a lot of consumers
chairman on the telephone bill
for services like streaming
video and this is something that
can be more than forty nine
other state in the country can
do today.
The second one all continue
their helpful build services
they use but they can get using
their devices.
The.
The legislative finance
committee fiscal impact report
notes that the attorney
General stated that it's
comparable communication
providers all the descriptions
have not opposed.
And that this bill to clarify
that that practice is not
contrary to the cramming and
slamming at.
And also the fiscal impact
report.
Know that the public regulation
commission described the staff
to appropriations of tribal
party services after
problematic the state of this
legislation provides needed
correction thank you thank you
Mr thank you thank you miss
McCabe.
And and the and so you know then
we also we have the the fiscal
impact report we'll have that in
our position at all times all
right members of the committee
question center every sort of
thank you Mr chairman I I I
would press that he could be in
prices are on the same page this
is one of the prime rules here.
hello this act but otherwise you
know this is something that has
been working through the last
few years and and I would really
appreciate the time.
Angel so
well yeah I would be the center
of that.
To do.
Thank you Mr chair and so you
know I talked to the folks on
this bill about this bill before
session and senator Tom as well
and it's I'm interested to hear
how it's being framed now which
is quite different than I think
that the very honest
conversation that we had before
session because this isn't just
about modernizing this isn't
modernizing the statute so that
people can stream things on
their phone everyone in New
Mexico stream things on their
phones already I'm sure you all
do that on a daily basis as to
why the purpose of this bill is
to so as so that folks like say
Verizon can offer bundled
services like Disney plus and
when we we talked about this in
the last year the year before
when this bill was up in this
committee
and they want to be able to do
this because when you have a
whole bunch of your services.
All through this one service
through your phone call it and
then let's say T. mobile says we
have a much better deal for you
and you want to switch to T.
mobile as a consumer you're a
lot less likely to leave Verizon
and go get that better deal T.
mobile because if you do so all
of your other services are that
you have right now on your
Verizon bill or can get cancer
this is a way for companies to
keep.
To try to keep consumers with
and this is certainly wrong with
that try it a couple of things
one I'm not sure why it is our
obligation as a legislature to
help multinational company that
is not based here in New Mexico
and I.
Keep New Mexican consumers and
make it make it harder for them
to to get a better deal when one
is all might be offered and to I
I had sent to the folks behind
this bill off so we had a we had
a long conversation about this
before session and afterwards I
appreciate their lobbyists and
and I also told Center comment
about this conversation that
fact because I I try to think of
what would get me to be a yes on
this bill I said if you all
would add something in there
that would make sure that I
doing this bundling allowing
this bundling that gives you
Verizon the advantage of kind of
getting deeper hopes and
consumers if you would compare
with that of bills and benefit
to the consumer so let's say
they're getting those additional
services at a lower rate and
that that is locked in for you
know the the entirety of their
contract then then there's a
benefit to both parties that
that that I think makes that it
makes sense for us the
legislature to be putting
something like this those
changes were not made and are
not being offered this is this
is not just a.
Telecommunication modernization
bill this is a.
Verizon wants to keep consumers
from being able to easily switch
to someone a bill
and and when offered the
opportunity to also make changes
that would ensure that those but
that benefits also accrue to
consumers that was not about
half was not taken.
So well there was no public
opposition to this bill I am
very opposed to this bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you the
committee members of questions.
Senator you had a motion that
you were gonna make yes I think
chairman of I would like to pass
on this bill.
Any other discussion questions
comments of us to roll call
please.
Senator Baca no.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart now.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator do hate.
Now.
Senator but you had a pass into
the new season of events from
yes I agree ado passed thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senator
Kernan.
Senate bill one.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and today with
percent Senate bill one fifty
and I would like to call
attention to the fact that this
bill was amended in the previous
committee just wanted to note
that online thirteen page one we
did strike and conduct an
investigation so we took that
out sorry would you say that you
yes just a page thirteen no page
one I'm sorry line thirteen.
we did try and conduct an
investigation so we took that
out at the request of the
committee and and you should
have the amendment in your.
In your file that that the
second thing we did on page two
online line we struck shell and
moved back to the work may so
those are the two changes that
we made which I think going
forward certainly makes it
something that we could consider
hopefully he will consider but
basically this bill Mr chair
members of the committee we know
current statute requires that
hospitals and birthing centers
create a plan of care for all
substance exposed newborns and
according to state statute the
Planeteers intended to make sure
that the babies when they leave
the hospital are safe and in
good hands and we know that
planets here include services
for that for that mom for the
family and for the baby to make
sure that that occurs the
problem is when a plan of care
that is developed by the care
coordinator at probably at the
on staff at the hospital or and
MCO care coordinator when they
present the plan of care to the
family before leaving the
hospital sometimes number one
sometimes it's not even percent
it sometimes we know that it's
rejected and we know that
because the department of health
The study that they created our
our published in the fall of
twenty one indicates that a high
percentage of families are
declining those services so we
have a situation with a plan of
care is is not followed through
on and the baby leaves the
hospital and we're we're in a
situation where really the only
alternative is for someone to
make a report and so a report.
Mr chair if if a report is made
there is a duty to report and it
goes to sky sky uses a tool to
determine if in fact there is a
need for an investigation what
we're suggesting is before you
get to that point if it's
realize that the plan of care
either is been rejected or is
not being followed.
Then there can be a request for
family assessment and all that
all that does is just the way to
do to just do an assessment
which does not necessarily lead
to an investigation they just
check to see that the baby is
set and we that is what our goal
is I would like at this time to
allow Jennifer L. L. from she's
in NYC you nurse from
Albuquerque just to say a few
words about with the new Q.
nurses are facing because a plan
of care system just does not
seem to be working for all the
babies.
Well recognized for a couple of
minutes so we really want to try
to stay pretty specific to the
bill as opposed to your general
experience but I appreciate a
couple minutes please yes Mr
chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer no
well and been indicators for
fifteen years and the last
couple of years I've never seen
this kind of situation be so dry
and tired and spent of eighteen
months we've had three babies
that have that we're exposed to
drugs in utero come back to our
units two of them were shaken
babies and one of them was a fan
all overdose.
Since its final overdose
awareness day let's talk a
little bit about that one of
that baby we set the mom up with
the safety care plan through
CYFD and we also set her up with
the car of plans she went home
with her baby on a Thursday and
was readmitted on Sunday couple
days later because she didn't
know how to care for that plan
and she had no support there was
no follow up from the NCOs
there's no follow up from CYFD
the plan that she agreed to in
the hospital was not what she
did at home we failed these
parents this parents we fail to
the baby and we felt the need to
staff we take care of these
babies for months at a time
withdrawing them from it and we
get attached to them and our
Nikki staff is
a motion the damaged as well as
the for the you know from seeing
these babies be readmitted and
we're losing nurses so.
Some something needs to be done
with the follow up
once these babies are discharged
thank you very much and we
appreciate very much what you're
doing and respected a great deal
on the specifics of the bill
however the only proponent we
have researchers Maryland back.
Meramec appears.
You know.
We don't have any opposition
registered.
systems are you on this bill for
some reason.
And if so.
the millers and how one one.
I mean other than in a were well
concerned about the points that
are made here in the the status
of the king of young people the
failings of CYFD but we're on a
specific bill so what is what we
do have a specific role will
chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza in this
capacity registered lobbyists in
New Mexico child first network
which brought the bills Senator
Kernan.
Okay thank you we will start
committee members Senator Ivey
Soto.
Sure
is there we follow so there's a.
Coming.
Mr chair we we amended the bill
and
Public Affairs and that should
be it's online with the.
I just was trying to explain to
him in the.
And the second thing is we know
that for a few minutes ago.
We will
what CYFD fix our facility here
for something on that.
Well Mr chairman I can't speak
for CYFD think survivors were at
the first hearing and we amended
the bill I think probably at
their
urging because after their
testimony we realize that that
we didn't need to go directly to
an investigation and that's why
we struck that in the title and
we changed we we feel like just
a family assessment was at least
a step in the right direction we
did not feel that investigation
was something that CYFD wanted
to handle and that's what we
just simply went to
encouraging a family assessments
are
and then at that if after the
assessment if they find that the
services are everything is in
pretty good shape then that's
the end of it if they don't then
they would move to an
investigation but that's already
involved.
In the original bill.
Twenty twenty.
Yeah it
wasn't able to actively
participate in
you can ask your if you want to
ask a specific question are you
talking.
Thank Mr chair Senator Ivey said
I do very much appreciate the
sponsor.
this bill and a half.
Families however.
It is not in order.
Opposition and have been working
very hard to
it doesn't see the care plan in
the reason why we are supportive
of this bill the
house bill four hundred four
thousand five
More robust in.
Rating the need I see if the
program and this person was in
the office Department of Health
HST early childhood.
Alright then Public Education
Department trials everything
from.
Insuring that this.
Just a recording of the glasses
hospitals to get us involved
there is concern other than
just.
Representative for.
Some understanding the mid is
available okay so parents.
Released from a hospital.
I don't care if they don't
comply with the I don't care.
We have the department would not
notified Department.
Dispensational contact families
us.
Based on the results the
department shall offer provide
those.
And then.
That doesn't work the department
may proceed with the
investigation.
That is that correct.
Have.
I'm curious what the.
I mean somebody that care and
it's not be complied with.
Some curious.
What the what's the process of
Family assessment.
And what does that help create
an issue.
Mr chair and senator so
currently.
As it works now before I guess
you consider that CYFD bill
which I have not seen
currently as these babies are
being released to the parents
and a plan of care either is not
accepted it's possible that
they're not complying with the
plan of care the end
we're asking I think the
hospital maybe the Nikki nurse
staffing the hospital the care
coordinator with the NCO to
notify CYFD and ask them to to
just do a family assessment to
make sure the babies okay I I
guess I'd I don't understand why
that would be objectionable I
CYFD not have us on that baby
when obviously plan to care is
either not being accepted not
being followed and she wants
like one thank you.
please these models are taking
care of home these babies are
usually moms are wanting to make
a change in their life you know
they're withdrawing from an
addiction as well and they're
trying to care for an addicted
baby that is withdrawing just
because we sent home a baby from
the hospital doesn't mean that
that baby has stopped
withdrawing so these babies are
extremely hard to care for plus
you're in a situation where a
mom is very fragile or the care
giver is very fragile and so
just having an extra set of eyes
if that mom is stumbling not
complying with that plan of care
that she agreed to in a safe
environment like a hospital or
even if they deny that planet
Kerr from the beginning that's
like it's just a little red flag
and it's just an extra step of
support.
And and if I could I could part
of the department.
What the problem is we doing a.
Family assessment for that
point.
We know that.
We know that they're not
compliance is only working or
not.
Who who.
CYFD so Senator when you're
calling on folks from the
artists are going to use my
phone because the members of the
committee who are participating
online cannot hear.
What's being said this is often
the.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair thank you Senator Ivey
Soto the couple things with that
with that shot all is
This program is a voluntary
program we receive over thirty
five there or not we.
Over thirty five hundred plans
of care have been conducted for
everything from tobacco use
prescription drugs that were
prescribed to
serious drugs like
methamphetamines and so that
shall does not allow for this
program to continue to be
voluntary and use the approach
of a.
but behavioral health and
medical condition approach that
in in addition CYFD does to get
involved we have been involved
in over forty percent of those
plans of care throughout since
twenty nineteen and so as long
as those reports from the
hospitals are being called to
CYFD for with concerns of abuse
and neglect we are investigating
those
this third part is that this
bill does not allow for
inappropriate doesn't provide an
appropriation additional
resources would be necessary for
the department to conduct those
assessments with families again
on a voluntary basis.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and I was
looking looking this over so
from what I see from the
amendment basically all it did
was reverse the the initial
bill's proposal on line to of
proceeding with the of the
investigation back to a may so
the but but I think what bothers
me Mr chair and and senator with
that is that we would be seeing
the investigation on.
Whether the family participates
or not rather than the outcome
of the family assessment which
Mr chair just doesn't make much
sense to me I would you can
respond to that but I would
think that that we would be
seeing mastication the
assessment not their
participation or not.
You Mr chair would you like to
respond please.
Chairman and Senator Baca.
Obviously what you're saying is
making sense that's existing
statute that that we didn't
change Senators existence that
there.
Well yes it's existing statute
but we're changing the way it
operates a guesser and I would
I would like to know Mr chair
and senator if you would be
amenable to changing the
investigation procedure
to a discretionary basically
judgment call based on the
criteria that is set up in the
assessment of the underlying
causation factors that may
jeopardize the safety of the
well being of the child so we
conduct the investigation.
If we see that
the safety or well being of the
child are jeopardized
Is there any thoughts on that
other than whether they
participate or not now we're
looking at the child not the
family's participation stat.
So Mr chair just one circle back
to what what what we did we
return to the language online
nine page two back to the
original puts in statute so
basically we didn't we didn't
change anything there so we kept
it may cause the issue of an
investigation is a very serious
part of this and we we I agree
we agree that that oftentimes
you don't need to go to that
extra step in investigation the
family assessment just puts on
his on the situation whether
it's the family the mom the baby
it's all encompassing just to
make sure their safety there for
the baby ensure I get that Mr
chair and senator I I understand
we're back to the existing
statutes with the amendment I
get that well I guess what I'm
saying is so we and I'll give
you a scenario we do the family
assessment we find out that
there are underlying causation
factors that will jeopardize the
safety wellbeing well being of
the child but since they decided
to except the the servicer
program the the they now are not
going to have the investigation
I would think the should have
the investigation if we find out
those exist I don't know maybe
on we are wrong chairman Senator
Baca my understanding so the
three things that the assessment
was that is the imminent danger
to the child well being
childhood have been abuse
childhood neglect a child and
that the strings needs of the
child family members to take
care of that child.
My understanding even so if they
do see imminent danger to the
child will be that would be a
reportable under child abuse and
neglect so that would trigger a
report to CYFD Anders guy if if
there was.
That immediate danger to the
child.
Under existing law.
I I may have an amendment to
offer in a in a base here but
I'll just sit and listen if
there's more to be thank you Mr
chair Senator.
Thank you Mr chair
so you know Senator Kernan said
this earlier but.
This this bill really is just
this is a kind of a common sense
thing to put eyes on can when
when there's a concern
I think that that the intention
behind care when it was passed
it was a good one but I don't
think cares work.
I think even CYFD would would
acknowledge it and and they have
that other Carrabelle
so I think even CYFD knows cares
isn't working so I think this is
a common sense
Effects to make sure that when
plans of care are being
followed.
We have eyes on this kid and on
this family and and we are in a
better position as a state to
get them the resources that they
need so that that if we can stay
together and and and those kids
can be healthy and well cared
for
so I'll leave it at that thank
you Mr.
Thank you others many members.
Questions.
Motions anyone else so somebody
wanted to maybe come back to it
what you're thinking of they're
going to do an amendment I.
Want to share a lot of what is
been said so I won't repeat it
but.
I'm always concerned
increasingly more so with this
bill and uses words like may and
shall those through the unit to
Key words that the gentleman a
lot of what we do here is as
long as we've we've in order to
get the bills for today because
it really was a memorial it was
a bill that you know said
contractor shall offer renewable
infrastructure of the building
but there was no consequence you
know and that was my question
for the Sanchez what happens
when they don't there's nothing
so we have to make more more
careful more more television
this committee and the
legislature about passing good
thoughts and well wishes you
know we should be sending
greeting cards maybe more than
than consider these laws so when
when you're gonna change the
maybe a shower I think that's
probably has some consequence
here in and so I appreciate that
in the first instance the
unfortunate I know this is
existing language on the second
page those as the department
shall offer provide referrals
for counseling
that's that's the issue we have
four of a you know you shall
offer.
I don't know I have no idea what
I mean you years of.
Here's an offer take it or leave
it doesn't mean anything to me
also went to the Department I
guess shall offers better than
saying may offer because right
now the existing languages they
may offer something that's just
completely meaningless
and and I see the sponsor
nodding affirmatively just we
passed so much law and and
you're working with existing law
worse just.
At the it's hallmark stuff and
and the really like I said long
that a greeting card rather than
the in laws anyway so I I think
you're doing something here when
you say the department shall
offer but again I don't really
know what that's gonna mean
because what happens when the
department doesn't do that
nothing right so it's better the
United courage's Center and
other states we're gonna do
something about CYFD really help
kids for being horribly treated
mistreated kids we should do
something more than hallmark
cards and best wishes and so the
apartment you know shall offer
referrals okay
maybe they're doing it maybe
they're not that they don't do
it so what and then and so this
better but it's almost better
than nothing I guess what I'm
saying and and that's just the
way it characterizes although
for it but it's this really is
is better than nothing but but
we should be doing a lot more I
think and I I know Senator I
know your heart is where it's at
and I'm I'm kind of challenging
you hope that's coming across
and not going to be negative
with you I'm going to
challenges.
No let's rise up here a little
bit of and then you know the
existing one which is even
almost more incredibly
nonsensical
we're associate we're requiring
the department to offer them
services and then it says the
parents and the need to guard is
a caretakers may choose to
accept or decline that offer
while you know how powerful of
us to to put into law that we
can offer something they may
choose to decline it wonder how
long we had to think hard about
whether we're going to do that
and the law and it says and then
so and if they decline the
department may proceed with an
investigation I think you're
leaving that that last one is
saved as a may right.
Really we we should really be
ashamed of ourselves and and I
see you nodding your head
affirmatively and I see you
ma'am as in the you know of
medical practitioners wishing of
ourselves the the this is what
we think this is an
accomplishment.
to protect children right.
We shall offer them something
and they may or may not accept
it and then they choose not to
accept it
we're telling of the names were
put into law you can choose not
to accept our offer and if you
choose not to accept your offer
we may investigate.
While.
I'm some struggling because of I
want hi I know your.
To try to make progress in
almost like Terry I to be
centered but the but you know I
mean we should be Terry I.
With with the consequences of
what we're doing here.
We can do better than this.
We can do a lot better than this
so it's better than nothing.
Yeah you might get my vote for
better than nothing.
Hope that he feels Mr chair now
ask.
Appreciate it.
You thank you Senator.
I feel very much to see why it.
I am not hard.
East main.
I know that's kind of all this
so if you see on the first page.
Are you saying.
Alright so family says.
So you could take off offer for
so the department staff find.
That I think that senator
Clemente the think they're
keeping that show that that
shall in that instance stays
there so you're still offered.
What I find chapter five.
Because that's a lot more they
felt that was not here it is it
is here it is K..
So it's small but.
That's one way to have a little
bit more.
at eleven eight zero understand
Changes.
But I was aware of four million
what that I either you know I
wish we still had to shelve the
last one.
See what.
What we're doing.
So if are often I'm left in the
officer for.
The proposed amendments page two
line one strike and was offered
for discussion on the proposed
amendment.
Seeing no discussion is there
any objection to the of.
Yes yes.
Sanchez is friendly saying our
position show center I've I've
been asked by some of the folks
are online to sometimes
announced a vote a bit more and
I've had some objection to
taking both of them by roll call
from some of the press I'm not
going to require a roll call
every books I think that just
plugs of stamina I will announce
the votes of the folks who are
listening know what the boat
look like so the amendments
adopted with the support of
center Ivey Soto center steward
Center o'neill Senator bottoms
Center Bach incentive for and
online senator Wirth in center
Duhigg there being no objection
to that amendment that
amendments adopted Senator
Stewart.
I want the no not that none do.
So.
I don't like the maybe the
taking wage jobs will be.
Originally this on the main
line.
Senator.
So Mr chair and and I don't like
it either that the reality is.
The thousands of I mean I think
they're many babies that would
fall under the the shall now in
to be honest I know the
department is asked for
additional funding I think
they're going to get additional
funding for these kinds of
things but I don't know for sure
but the cost to the department
to to shall proceed is going to
be a huge costs and I'm I'm not
happy with much of anything
that's going on served on the
enhancement committee this
interim and what I heard so
disturbing four months but this
is a baby step it is at least
putting ice on a baby just that
baby's leaving the hospital just
to make sure is a baby even in a
home where is it so I I think
it's a baby step and I
appreciate
the comments of her today it's
the first in current treatment.
Received.
Because of money I like that.
Welcome center was so.
And so Mister chair so we
adopted Senator Stewart's
amendment and I I took a stab at
this and and hopefully it goes
well with that because I don't
see Mr chair and senator the
purpose of having a family
assessment and the family is
says maybe has a determination
that there are factors that
jeopardized the safety and well
being of the child and then we
do not.
Representative says we may have
an investigation.
And so so I would offer an
amendment to you
where essentially what this
would do was would be if the
family assessment shows that
there are factors that
jeopardize
the the the underlying cause
eight the the the safety well
being of the child then we do
have an investigation because we
have results of the test Mister
chairman Senator at that point
that says Hey here's of factors
now we need an investigation and
so that way that way it's not a
shell every single time.
But if the factors are present
and then it's time for
investigation I I would like to
hear some thoughts on this Mr
chair and and I I think in
current law when we pass a bill
two years ago that there is
always the duty to report so
when you see that family
assessment and things aren't
what they should be then there
is a duty to report that
triggers the investigation CYFD
would be forced to go ahead and
go through it's called sky and
then that's the tool thank yous
so that doesn't mean just
because you have an
investigation you know you have
to go through that tool to
determine whether
That to date step beyond that is
that correct in.
That's the system that's in
place now and in so.
That's their if there is a duty
to report if you see something
that is not good they have to
report that and that triggers
the investigation notification
does not.
Reporting yes so if I'm hearing
right Mister chairman Senator if
the assessment shows these
factors present that jeopardize
the safety and well being of the
child then you're telling me
that in another section of law
investigation is triggered by
the assessment by the assessment
right.
It's just going to school yes
correct okay.
I'll leave it at that no need
for change.
Senator.
Mr chair I was just gonna say
the exact same thing Senator
Kernan just that.
The gross pleasure the
committee.
Service so.
Yeah I I'm really proud of that
hello for those reasons.
Senator because I was once part
of the yes to the to the
swimming pool and
That's good to second all.
Exactly Mr Chairman what's for
sure looking at the language.
This because the discussion
we're having on Senator one of
seven Leslie.
About how the.
Right right and the.
The children's goes right
not only in this in the collect
about always return the child to
the home.
But then and and article three a
different article private it's
written in terms of.
It also would like to intervene
but we don't want to overstep
our our our place and really we
don't want to inconvenience
anybody in if you don't want us
here well that's okay we'll just
go away.
You know it's it's up I mean
that's that's how the truth is
what is written in.
We need a comprehensive re
writing of the children doing.
the.
I don't see the the will of the
department reference but
all right that's gonna do any
good either but.
I am you know I am concerned
about about the the reality.
Of the resource issues that the
department has and if you and
that.
The failures of the department.
Don't stem exclusively.
The problem the resource issues.
But but the resources but we're
trying to.
Changes made without.
The resource issues do become.
A parent especially.
I did it and I guess here's
here's my concern right a family
assessment means up.
Comprehensive assessment
prepared by the department.
At the time the pharmacies
notification failure to comply
with planetary to determine the
needs of a child and child
parents.
Guardians caretakers including
assessments like the in danger
tell him interviews job
strengths and needs of a child
family members.
With respect provided for health
and safety of the child that
doesn't sound like a small
thing.
And then the very right to work
telling the department you
shall.
To this.
Conference report.
And the very next line is.
The child's parents artist
relatives or caretakers mentions
except for the client.
Whatever's up.
And and so if I don't find a
problem putting the
responsibilities of the
department.
Where things are going to yield
and the next step I might my
concern is putting the
responsibility.
To do additional work of the
department when the next line
says.
And it could just be disregarded
anyway.
Because part of my concern is
is.
Recognizing the.
The resource allocation issues.
Is that what point and we saw
exacerbated research resource
allocation issues legislative
plans I would just we don't have
anybody actually going out of
the something.
That makes sense and and and and
I would Mr chairman of I would
like to hear from some of her
not so Mister chairman Senator
Ivy Soto I think cost is a
concern but you could also look
at the other side of the cost
when those babies to return to
the hospital when their lives
are impacted to the point where
they're going to be a very
costly child going through this
through their lifetime so those
are costs that that we in court
in addition to to see Westies
cost and
it is costly and I do think that
with the into the into the day
just because when they don't
comply and we're not seeing I
don't know if we have to hold
the entire Original Bill that in
that that does trigger CYFD when
they just refused to comply.
They could potentially go to
court and take that child in I
think the punitive part is what
CYFD is concerned about they
want this to be something they
agree to that they're willing to
work on it I think in many cases
like to state that want that for
their baby but sometimes I think
we go too far about not wanting
to create a situation for the
family to to reject Services
because we don't hurt their
feelings or make them feel bad
and we put the baby's locket
risk so that's the balancing act
no interest in CYFD and the care
and I care that bill in the
Senate nine it turned out not to
be working so that's why I'm
just here trying to fix one part
of it and then looking forward
to the bill that CYFD percents
maybe it's a great bill I don't
know universities to a four
hundred kind of awesome and
we're going to are you trying to
amend transport train propose
I'm not sure where we're going.
I'm just trying to Mr.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I've I've struggling
with that same language starting
online for after the period
where it says the child's
parents relatives guardians or
caretakers may choose to accept
to decline any service or
program offers us with the
family Madam provided that if
the child's parents relatives
gardens are care takers decline
the services or programs so in
the first part there's already
been a determination that
there's a problem.
And they were saying well you
chose not to accept the help.
Well why don't we in in Mr chair
all offer this is an amendment
starting after the period online
for striking all the way through
like ten because we had just
heard that through the other
child because the county do an
investigation if if necessary so
we don't need any of that
language
and it goes along with what
Senator Stewart just amended in
that we're going to find these
referrals because there is a
problem.
And there's enough of a problem
they don't have the option to
decline it.
J. sentiment to take them.
But chairman Senator Pirtle I
guess my comment on that that
would be is.
If we struck that language the
only ability for them to proceed
with an investigation is if
there was imminent harm and
there was a report made.
I potentially with this language
in there.
Really given how weak it is with
the NMAA I'll be honest.
If they decline the services so
so they may not see a baby in
imminent danger when they do the
family assessment but they may
see these other conversations
that don't rise to the level of
a duty to report so that if they
do decline the services the
department has the ability to
investigate my worry would be if
we do delete that language they
would have the ability to
investigate purely because of
the the quality of services.
So Mister chair stressed and
also then I would I would change
my amendment and then strike
through life line.
Through the.
And then insert before
Department capital the.
And then it would basically read
this blind for jeopardizes
safety well being of the child
and then the department may
proceed with an investigation.
Just giving them the permission
to do exactly what Mr chair and
and senator what you're wanting
to do that at that point they
may have that ability but we're
not giving the ability to
decline services because we've
identified that there is an
issue with that services are
necessary.
Chairman Senator Pirtle.
Sure I can go through what the
amendment would be the find a
line for after child period we
would strike.
So nine line programs calm of
the.
And before Department insert
capital the so essentially
online for the paragraph would
end after child and then it
would say the department may
because of the amendment the
department may proceed with an
investigation.
Okay.
Good.
Thank you Mr chair I I think
that amendment just offered
would alleviate all my concerns
I think it leaks in very well
with senator Stewart's amendment
now we've removed that we have
an investigation that's already
going to take place as you
stated Mr chair through the
other section of law and yet it
retains the ability of the
department to have discretionary
control over the investigation
if we don't reach that bar of
jeopardizing the child or
whatnot
and that's all I have Mister
chair.
The Senator.
Mr chairman that's exactly what
I was struggling with sexing for
ten how the state what we want
to say we don't need hello they
can accept your money that's the
only to put it in so I'm not
fully on board with the
amendment
It seems to be to me there needs
to be some other.
In
But I can't figure it out yet
but I'm still looking at.
The for the discussion in
central New.
This is a friendly amendment Mr
chair.
Mr
Receive the amendment is one
more time your of your own
meeting online for.
Meeting with the period you
strike everything after the.
We we would try Mr chair after
the period starting with the
online for two line line the
before the department and then
we have to insert a new the with
a capital T..
No pre pursue investigations
right.
May these are super.
Senator so.
About two before we do that we
say.
If the child's parents relatives
for caretakers declined any
service or program.
The department they received
investigations.
And I think you.
I think Mr chair Senator wind up
back in the same boat we're.
Again now the department that
may and yet we've declined
services once we've identified
that serves services are
necessary and so the intent of
my amendment is to essentially
take that option away that we
we've we've determined that
services are necessary why do we
want to give the option to
decline those if they are
necessary correct Mr Chairman
going on so yeah all right okay
with.
Mr chair if I may have to
enrollment yeah I'm gonna get
you Senator do that on the
amendments are doing in in just
a.
A little bit of where we're at
so called for Center woods to be
here so appreciate that will
trying here years on the
veterinary Act as by last
business we're going to get
before five o'clock today just
for anyone else was here this
this bill I thought with
changing a couple words is going
to be a very short discussion
and it's turning into much more
than that so Senator.
Thank you Mr chair on the
amendment thank.
So my understanding and and and
please anyone there who knows
differently but feel free to
correct me but I understand that
sometimes there will be services
that are being accessed that
might be.
Apart from what CYFD
specifically presenting but that
are still meeting that the
concerns that might exist for
the child so.
Sometimes just just of the the
parents declining the specific
services that are being offered
at that time.
And again it may on the
initiating medication but I
think this is this is a little
bit of a secure issue that.
Then what can be solved just
with this ammendment and I think
curious to hear from miss Martin
for CAFD there because I I read
just remember at this issue
coming up just recently in a
conversation with with the
secretary of CYFD that I had and
so.
I guess I wonder if if she could
explain to the Canadian wine.
Why there would be a situation
where.
We want to leave some
flexibility where apparently
declined some of those services
are referrals but it would not
necessarily at that that doesn't
mean that that the whatever
issue there as is not being
addressed.
I think the circumstance the
situations might exist.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg one of
the reasons why someone may
decline a service just because
they're already engaged in
services they may already be
engaged in substance abuse
outpatient therapy or they may
already have WIC and so
identifying that again as
another service that they need
when they're already there may
be a reason why they would
decline a service.
Thank you and you know and.
So there's also I'm getting some
text here about housing
assistance the people decline
decline services that's the term
because what they really need is
like emergency rental assistance
or something like that
and so well well I I I I
certainly appreciate the intense
of this amendment and and agree
with the intent of it.
I I I think it I'm I'm not
entirely sure I I support it I
think we might be doing
something pasty here that might
have impacts beyond what we're
anticipating with this
particular amendment.
Thank you Mr chair.
It's a great for a vote on the
amendment I will do my roll call
please.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Center I'm sort of yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth.
Past.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yeah.
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator yes the amendment
adopted on the bill as amended.
Intel's new.
S. is for do passes amended the
roll call vote please similarly.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Sir I was supposed to pass.
Several new.
For purpose.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator do.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto president.
Senator yes and I'd like to
explain my vote you'll have
heard plenty from me already but
let me and on a challenge for
you again Senator we're doing.
A little but very very little
in a in a place of our state
government where we should be
doing a lot and you know that
and I I see from your expression
face to you're going to you're
going to do a lot so I hope you
will
this is this is hard for me to
to support because it feels like
so little and I guess the other
concern I have to use it I'm not
sure that what we're doing here
is just going to just invite a
veto
and you're not in your head
affirmatively like you see that
too.
I don't see why I need to get
off their ****
And that's my I don't I don't I
mess with say this anymore I'm
I'm beyond frustrated so I can't
say nice anymore and
I hope the message gets out
there and I can understand where
the executive might save I'm not
gonna.
I'm gonna take that bill but.
We're doing we can was two more
hi thank you very thank you so.
Senator Woods you've got Senate
bill for for centenary loan
repayment.
And I want to let the committee
know we got a hard stop it I
let's keep our discussion and
comments mindful of that.
When just as a reminder for
everyone when I when when you're
recognized by the chair.
You've got control of the floor
so expect you to ask questions
that are sharp and get sharp
answers and if you wanna let
somebody wax on that's on you
but the chair made interjected
and bring it into that so
Senator Woods for for.
Thank you Mr.
Senate bill four oh four.
This bill creates a veterinary
loan repayment act the the
legislation authorized our
education department to pay back
loans incurred by veterinarians
and veterinary technicians.
Should they need to meet certain
requirements the program is open
to US citizens in New Mexico
residents and provides
preferences for veterinarians
and veterinary technicians who
are graduates of New Mexico post
secondary institutions and those
practicing in shortage areas
designated by the higher
education department.
The amount of the loan may not
exceed the total debt and is
based on the location of the
practice in the total
indebtedness of the applicant
loan repayment through just
before forward car applicants to
enter a two year contract with a
higher education department
during which a.
Practice in New Mexico.
And higher education makes
annual payments to the holders
of the participants loan debt.
provide for penalties in the
event the loan repayment breaks
the term of the contract.
And with that I would stand.
Well I wouldn't mention one of
the state this is a not
identical.
Actor denticle of legislation
that we use for medical doctors.
That is to simply took out the
medical doctors important
inventors so sickly it's in
statute as it is Mr chair I
stand for questions.
Thank you senator.
Registered in support.
Jason Thompson New Mexico
veterinary medical association.
Yes.
the one of madam chair to.
With that merry medical
association there are no
opponents to the bill.
Fifty thousand with with Mexicos
veteran medical association I
won't take too much resentment
thank you do the sponsor for
working on this that as you'll
see there's quite a few bills
pertaining to the very
veterinary shortage that we have
in the state does a really good
tool to try and levy a some of
that by mainly helping with the
tuition but also creating that
type of landscape that we need
to get to to recruit and retain
and continue to hire veterans of
one of the practice here so we
really does is a good tool to
start with that we really
appreciate the sponsors were for
that reason for the thank you.
H. members the committee.
Question Senator I think
chairman so I read through this.
AS one thing that kind of makes
you positive that that really
concerns him page five line
twenty.
If they don't comply with the
terms of the contract.
The department shall assessment
at three times the amount of a
war.
Plus fifty percent interest that
seems.
Office harsh.
As a penalty
At this point that out however
my Representative seven section
in the bill.
Representative says the
department may cancel any
contract made between that and
any measurement right technician
forty eight will cost the
suppression of the contract
provided apartment.
I just not a fan of that even if
it already is for medical
doctors.
So Mr chairman I would move to
strike section and for the.
Mr chair of two.
I know that there's a motion on
the floor so you may want to get
a second there is a motion for
districts section eight the
motion is the only Canadian
don't require a second Senator I
don't know why other teachers to
that the ask for seconds but
it's not a requirement I don't
requirements that's the motion
centers
risotto's made a motion to
strike section if you want to a
point on that the only thing
that that I say is that someone
has to have a.
State so whether contract is
fulfilled.
And that's only.
Discussion I would have on that
that's certainly up to you I'm
not going to.
Okay I'm not going I'm not going
to
declared on friendly.
I understand it was Mr Chairman
there was in
is with other contract with
those contracts I just don't and
they failed with the terms of
the contract they feel the terms
I just don't want the property
will be the only cancer
contract.
So there is contract without any
need yep that's the motion any
other discussion probably my my
opinion probably unlawful that
language anyway you know to put
into statute saying that the
state agency can cancel
contract.
It deems because sufficient
meaningless and probably
unlawful and so Sir I appreciate
the fact that copied over but
you capital from similar
decision know what they were
doing.
At the time at the time so
Senator Baca I on the amendment
pro.
I don't know if the sponsor
determine and might consider
this for us instead say
reasonable cost being sufficient
by the department of for a
material breach of contract by
the department
a material breach of con tract.
With the department something
like that so you still have some
check in there and Mr I'm for
free back to the eight of eight
five of engineering technician
does not comply with the terms
of the contract.
Farmers also spending.
And plus interest so they
already provided we've so there
is this.
Talk about a penalty.
Association Mr chair with the
bridge for.
It doesn't appear the talk about
the cancellation of the
contract.
Sources that.
Only to spend several on the
amendment and Mr chair Senator I
I called the same thing that
that maybe would be better just
putting language with a breach
of contract as opposed to
destroying the entire.
With my same reading of the
amendment.
Senator anything else.
Hi the motion for by strike
section eight of them to the
committee I supported as I said
I.
We get with this language in any
bill and say that the state can
cancel a contract when we
building there's a cost
efficient that's going to be a
determination by the court we
don't I can't think of any good
reason whatever put that in the
statute.
To support the movement of.
On the amendment was just to buy
roll call please striking
section eight and then Senator I
was have you come back to the
other section issue raised about
the penalty in the interests
okay separation so on one second
section a roll call center about
yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator yes.
Part of yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Duhigg.
Yes.
Senator service yes the
amendment adopted Senator Ivey
Soto back to page five
subsection F. line eighteen.
Yes Representative that's
probably.
a little over the top
this is certainly the
I have a school or not certainly
Chairman you have ideas about
better ways to reach contract.
But let me suggest the center
remains of this and this really
for the committee members I
agree here over here the main
number one number two I I can't
imagine associate penalty more
than the amount of the award I
mean you know if you can get a
scholarship and you don't comply
you ought to have to repay the
scholarship but paid three times
the scholarship
makes no sense at all and let's
face it young people may decide
they want to be a veterinarian
and then find out along the way
they don't want to be a
veterinarian.
My oldest daughter started
medical school.
And the session will be Dr now
we're happy that you've made
that determination after a year
of medical school rather than.
To my friends or doctors find
out twenty years in the practice
in one of the doctors and so you
know it just it just seems like
a may and and and I don't recall
penalty maybe committee a
rewarding a penalty but maybe
maybe it's up in in may may
recover reimbursement
I don't think you put a eighteen
percent interest in their.
Maybe we just put something in
there put plus a you know and
appropriate rate of interest but
those are my thoughts for you
center this so it's really your
your caption all the for you to
fix it.
And I think Center purlins are
Baca may have some thoughts so
Senator thank you Mr chair I
appreciate that my my first
thought was obviously the
shelter may cause let's let's be
honest sometimes things happen
that are outside of someone's
control car accidents deaths
things like that it would be sad
if if somebody was paralyzed and
couldn't go to school anymore
and there they shall be assessed
a penalty off of what's already
happened in their lives so I I
think even if you get it down to
the amount of the award there
should still be a may under the
circumstances that are outside
of someone's control that have a
little grace a little compassion
if need be thank you Mr.
If I may center jump and you'll
you'll know that the language of
falls after that is is the the
partner may find acceptable
extenuating circumstances so
there's you know there's some
provision for that but I can't
think of any circumstances where
we want to have to have them pay
three times the amount of the of
the scholarship committee with
scholarship that's kind of the
way and thinking about this Sir
Baca gems of the wind and.
Ross is working on language of.
Committee members others service
photo yeah Mr chairman of on
page five Lansing stretch out
and certainly.
May I line twenty strike a
penalty of up to three times
the.
And
and insert and so the Adam out.
And then after the word of
mouth.
Equal to the.
Unreimbursed.
portion of the award.
And then on line twenty one
strike eighteen percent.
And insert the statutory rate
of.
Is there such a thing with
stature rate of interest first
quarter for for this application
about four or four deaths.
Project gap.
In the corner reason for we.
Better check that.
Mr chair.
Senator Wirth yes I would yeah
what is that.
Yeah there definitely is a
statutory rate of interest it's
been adjusted over time so I was
thinking exactly the same thing
as a provision air so that it
can be.
Flax if we change it but I think
center box right it's in the
eighty percent range at this
point.
we we just say stature rate of
interest for contracts
preservers session rates of
interest I agree with you there
is there are stature rates and
rates of interest but there are
on various things like for
example there's a statutory rate
of interest for verbal contracts
and then there's a separate
session rate of interest for
written contracts and I think
they're different
so I I just maybe suggest
because saturated interest for
contracts.
How the election of senators for
over lives and.
Six percent all Mr chairman I.
I think the jury is.
That in their church and merry
technicians this not comply with
the terms of the contract
And unless the department finds
acceptable extenuating
circumstances for why the
veterinarian or veterinary
technician cannot serve for
comply with the terms of the
contract
the department shall require
repayment of the loan.
Let's not charge them interest
that's ridiculous if you look at
the contract what their contract
is a minimum two year period of
service so if they can't that's
that's all it's going to be and
if there's other reasons why
they can't continue it that's
the extenuating circumstance so
you allow the department to look
at that but then they yes
require repayment of the loans
not interest or anything else so
that's that's what it says at
the end of the I took out the
plus the amount of the panel.
Just make this easy and not
require that.
Representative Steve give me a
hand signal of some kind which
I'm not understanding exactly hi
I've been given hand signals
before the session and I think
yes.
The different finger then your
thumb the signal I've been given
sent.
Hi my hand signal was that at
the center of your there are
conferences job of the food
entire subsection I did and I
would yield a suggestion all
right so.
Mmhm.
Let's let's let's have you read
it again please Senator this way
it's going to go away okay.
Centenarian or veterinary
technician this not comply with
the terms of the contract.
Unless the department finds
acceptable extenuating
circumstances for why.
no we have to repeat that again
why they cannot comply.
The department shall require
repayment of the loan.
Then at that point it's a little
bit of massaging but there's two
massagers right over there is so
much needed I think you've got
it.
The first part of the party and
part take out all the questions
office of the board the again
replace those.
If you have a
Okay so one more time Senator
please looking at page five SO
program have phone line eighteen
this using the current.
Now all in itself so it's all
online eighteen all the line
nineteen until the work contract
with the.
Com.
Strike at the department shall
all of line twenty all of line
twenty one up through the
interest unless the department
stays San.
What sort of the yes and unless
the department finds acceptable
extenuating circumstances for
why.
That Narinder that Neri
technician cannot server comply
with terms of contract COVID go
to the next page go to line to
the Department shall require
repayment of the loan.
Is this a loan program.
There's a scholarship
reimbursement program for them
so yes so.
Repayment of the loan that.
No.
I have something else could.
I get money to.
Is okay we're out we're out for
us to run for pose a moment of
secretary of of the are you all
on that proposed amendment.
But I would offer suggestions if
I may so what I would do
Mr chair is I would strike
instead of this is offering to
you to deny or not from from the
work shell on line line
nineteen.
All the way through interest and
in lieu thereof.
Put me recover amount equal to
the amount that has been
dispersed that's it.
Mr chairman I might have
misunderstood the amendment then
decided here waiting Sir percent
state repeated of these.
So so what this amendment would
you would strike from the were
shell online nineteen all the
way to line twenty one up to
interest in lieu there of it
would say that that may recover
from out the equal to the amount
that has been dispersed so we
would say in total after the
comedy Department may recover an
amount equal to about that has
been dispersed eliminates the
interests and limits the penalty
and it retains the acceptable
extenuating circumstances
language.
Going to get rid of the other
stuff so you're needing in the
Leicester Department fines
unless the department finds
acceptable extenuating it leaves
that language all in.
And
it takes out nothing else just
that one sentence replaces it
with an amount to recover that
the amount that has been
dispersed eliminates interest so
I'll repeat it one more time so
on line nineteen strike from the
word shell.
July twenty nine twenty one.
Up to the word interest all that
goes away.
In lieu thereof may recover
undermount equal to the amount
that has been dispersed.
Yes our differences both in
certain senses.
Sir I.
Apartment does not provide any
waiting for and then they would.
Apartments shall require all of
that who.
All right so we've covered this
loan of US there was back to the
drawing board for you Sir
so will encourage you to work
with some of the folks here
today and staff but I agree with
Senator that we're we're working
too much on the fly your to much
work to do I think a lot of
folks on work with you on it hi
one of those suggested I think
we all support trying to want to
make sure you get there but
we're struggling with some of
language I don't think trying to
work it out here in the next
fifteen minutes as whites so
come back to see us again soon
Sir all right I will try my best
and I might to.
Save Mr chair.
Did.
Try to amend that livestock
larceny.
Bill.
to make it the same as a house
version and the only reason I
would like to for you to hear
that and see if it's acceptable
is to grease the skids for the
house version coming across.
But that's up to you Sir.
Thank you very much.
We've got the fifty members
before a hard stop I think we
can hear.
Senate bill two twenty for that
amount of time Senator Sedillo
Lopez I'm gonna present two
twenty fourths this.
To.
sentiment we brought you back
to.
All right let me let me let's
No no with those two to one
eighty seven we're trying to
twenty seven to twenty four and
fifteen minutes it's going to
we're we start getting hung up
or anything we're gonna jump
over you so I quit with I think
those are both pretty simple
bills.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the twenty seventeen
a version of this bill before
this is the capital offender at.
The statute currently applies to
all felonies except for D. W. Y.
the moving simple drug
possession recognizes that a
person who repeatedly possesses
drugs is not an incorrigible
fell and who needs to be taught
a lesson they're suffering from
a health problem that requires
treatment not prison.
The one and a half year sentence
for drug possession can be
suspended by the judge giving
them probation instead if a
person has prior felonies the
court has no choice but to
impose the mandatory enhancement
it is common to see people with
felony histories of just drug
possession with charges they get
their third or fourth offense
they end up with nearly a decade
incarceration just for having a
small amount of drugs.
In these drug possession cases
judges very often suspend
everything they can and people
end up sending people to prison
for mandatory time.
And they have no control over.
Sentencing commission data from
the end of twenty twenty two
shows up five percent of the
male inmates in New Mexico are
could come to right are
incarcerated for drug possession
only not trafficking fourteen
percent of the female in inmate
population and it's safe bet to
say that these individuals are
serving primarily or entirely
habitual offender enhancement
time not the basic one and a
half year sentence possession is
simply not a felony that the
logs of the eventual and enter
after good well we got it we
know it very well of doing
anything then this could Mr
Chairman we're just here to
answer questions thank you very
much of lots of folks.
Identified for proponents miss
cook signifies an expert of any
questions miss Baur there's an
expert to proponents include a
without a meal drug policy
alliance the guys hear Americans
for prosperity a loose dog
Campos hi zoom done in cash we
assume in support law offices of
the public defender Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association New Mexico safe
coalition bowl futures ACO you
for Lutheran if advocacy
national association of social
workers and all the other usual
suspects so
Motion for the past Senator
o'neill wanted to be on the bill
thirty seconds thank you for
this bill I had no idea that you
can rack up Vigil offender time
for like possession the signal
which is that criminal behavior
is often.
The root of it is diction you
know so can we can we be smart
on these kind of issues and
acknowledge what is and what it
isn't it's not a new felony you
know it's not somebody Robin
somebody again it's like
basically for using okay thank
you other members the committee
questions.
Enrollment center of cluster has
to pass motion thirty objection
saying none there's a do pass
survive on of projection shows
etcetera Ivey Soto Stuart
o'neill serve on to is worth and
do hearing test of.
For the past Center Baca in
opposition several million to do
passers much.
We can I think get through.
Two twenty four and only two
twenty four studio opens.
I'm sorry I don't mean I don't
mean to be to speak ill of folks
who just left the room you can
talk yourself out of the bill
really is in this committee
etcetera so you know.
At two twenty four you've got
ten minutes can do it thank you
Mr chair.
Okay
This bill.
The basically a mensa portions
of the mandatory medical
medical.
To remove the requirement to
establish and enforce the cash
medical support order five
dollars per month.
Human Services Department of
estimates the administrative
costs to establish and force a
five dollar medical support
orders a minimum of seven forty
seven hundred forty one dollars
not even counting the at the
time of the judges necessary and
good the system so this is this
is a bill.
The street bill to just remove
that requirement of getting a
five dollar we talk about Senate
bill two twenty four center.
I think so.
Yeah yes Representative real
quick so then there's a trust
for border the child covered by
Medicaid yeah right now the law
requires us to get an order for
by from the noncustodial parent
to pay that just in case at some
point the child goes off of
Medicaid and that way we know
where they are.
That's a stupid.
God.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
I didn't understand the bill
from reading now I do all right
support for opposition anyone
and we we get of nobody
registered in support or
opposition to the office so
there's no Richard opposition.
Two passed that I can try to
forty six million you we have
all right to twenty is two forty
six and you will not get it done
in the summer and I strive.
A further discussion of two
twenty four hour.
Thank is there any objection to
do pass motion on two twenty
four.
The do we need a motor with we
have a motion yes I hope.
Is there any objection.
Singers show Senator Ivey Soto
Stuart o'neill serve on to is
