This is the user of Bill.
Senator bill you're gonna be
probably an hour.
You're you're what we call about
an hour so these are often lose
anything else in rounders.
Right.
All right.
Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senate bill it of
one eighty three amends the
probate code and section forty
five five four twenty nine that
section per prohibits a
conservator acting in a
fiduciary capacity in the course
of administration of the state
to receive a waiver elation
liability Senate bill one eighty
three would allow releases and
waivers of liabilities for
conservative or agent when the
protected person or a person
interested in conservatorship is
represented by legal counsel and
I have to expert witnesses here
Jon Anderson represents the
bankers association senator
former senator Tim Jennings.
Jack and Jack Burton I'm sorry.
Other parts.
Mr chairman if perhaps he might
that take that I have our
experts speak at this point just
because Mr Burton has a another
engagement if that's possible.
We don't.
Register to speak for her
opposition.
It's already on.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I just want to say
three things very briefly
because I do have another
engagement it's birthday
celebration of the family that I
have to get to so I'll be brief
one is our time here as a
volunteer Representative anybody
two hi I am not aware of any
other state in the country has a
provision like this that
prohibits a waiver or release a
liability conserver.
Three.
That as soon as the New Mexico
could serve find out about this
provision say get out of the
business of being a concern for
the liability is used to great
and that's all I need to say I
will let.
Mister Jennings Mr Anderson.
Give you some examples thank
you.
Excuse me Senators and I'm Tim
Jennings are registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico bankers
association and I would just
like to speak a little bit on
behalf of of this bill and why
it's so important to one as most
of you know I I'm also.
Aired above individual accounts
individual who
That is out there and it also
this poses one of the problems
that we have for people who are
pro appointed as conservatives.
Most of times and this is also
for my accountant and and my
family we have I hi of five
others siblings and my County
says and all his time practicing
he's never seen a family that
has stayed together this long
with that one suing the other
one over.
The and the management of assets
that are there
And now when you turn around you
look when you have a child with
a disability it's the same way
because you have people that the
if there's any money left for
that child to to keep that
individual in and to take to
take care of them.
Every person in the family has a
different ad idea about how the
asset should be managed someone
an aggressive formed baby to
cover more.
You know more the time and
someone you know some and then
somebody wants to buy bonds and
the problem is is that with this
concern thank the the way the
conservatives with their low
light and if they're held a
liability for the rest of their
lives the concert or as every
person in that family can sue
the conservative that has a
difference of opinion on what
they do with the money and so
there's no way some now nobody's
going to be a conservative for
those individuals who are
challenged because state
everybody there they're liable
for ever and it just doesn't
work my count just says it it's.
You know when you when you do
this stuff with any kind of
family stop everybody has a
different opinion on how to look
after the money and and and how
to invest the money and so.
Each one each could servers a
libel from every member of the
family that had a different of
opinion difference of opinion so
it just doesn't work and this is
pretty slick because it he comes
in and to make sure that the
thank the person who is who's
assets are being considered as a
representative that it appointed
to represent their interest and
so I think it works a otherwise
just nobody will be a
conservative for anything with
for these individuals and now
that's the long and short of it
I think it is this is something
that is a workable solution and
I think you I hope you would go
ahead and do it.
Your.
Thank you Mr chair so I keep
hearing no one's going to be a
conservative but.
We have people who are being now
Mr chairman I have private
organizations who are
professional conservators and
and those are like like decades
and those are the ones who and
this would really concern me
frankly
because.
Being a conservative as a
position of remarkable trust and
getting to handle someone else's
money and and for their what
their welfare and.
years ago I had a.
A professional guardianship and
the server group
talk to a bunch of female
attorneys I I live in Los Alamos
at the time.
And there there's a kind of
cells on their services.
And they describe Mr chair.
I'm not even going to the
situation that they described
this kind of situation was so
disturbing to me is that.
There was a disturbing to me
that I immediately called are
aging long term services
department and and reported this
screws and they saw and and they
were shocked because there this
is a story their time trying to
sell their services when someone
is in that remarkable position
of trust to be able to.
Two and then eight.
Any potential liability if that
mistrust is misuse gives me a
lot of positive
and I I don't and I see that
this this is kind of hinging on
there being independent
councillor I don't know what
that means I don't know
independent counsel in this
context means
and it's not defined here so I I
have about this bill Mr chair
thank you for.
Sir what is wrong with.
So the spot there but.
All right and I haven't done
anything service I haven't acted
services since we change the law
quite frankly because we totally
reject additional law and
guardianships and
conservatorship but but I do get
a point I was sitting here
thinking I do get appointed as
as a fiduciary a number of times
in cases but I'm also wearing a
lawyer half so it's a little
bit.
Difference on just trying to
think through.
You know exactly how this would
work and maybe maybe maybe you
can address the strands in the
the.
You know the distinction here so
if the conservatives of someone
and and and senator Jennings
family is the conservative or
they're represented by using.
As the lawyer when when would
this.
This release when would it be
done as soon after the work is
done or how how would that work
Mr Chairman Senator Wirth how
would work is
First of all I have to recognize
we're changing nothing at all of
substance in the truck the
program codes I mean this
section II that were working on
appears and no other probate
code in the country if this is a
you need to New Mexico what
happens is is that when the
conservative or will file with
the court heard an accounting of
all records of all transactions
I'm sure you've been through
that many times and then you
will basically present those
documents and anything else that
the court requires you'll filing
accounting with the protected
person with the cord and with
any interested party that
requires a request the the
county and then the court will
review those records and then
perhaps asked for other other
records other information on not
it's quite a complicated
situation and then at that point
in time the court will then
release you or terminate your
conservatorship so then you are
at that point freeing where from
from liability unless there is
later determined to be
negligence all I never at that
point you have the statute of
limitations on bringing those
types of actions the problem
with this is and I talked to a
couple of my our partners and do
this thing
a lot of people are serving as
conservatives without knowledge
of this is on the books to be
quite honest I was shocked quite
frankly to find out there are
people serving as conservatives
because this basically because
you do have a liability in
perpetuity there's no there's no
end in sight if you well stocked
in knowing how this committee
works here's a question so I'm
the conservator can I get a
court order for that approved
the accounting that I've done
and says that I'm discharged
what you're telling me is that
the staff.
Ashu basically is gonna leave me
on the hook and purpose.
If if if you I'm sorry if we
don't change as of Mr chairman
and senator Wirth if we don't
change this there is there is no
way that you're going to be
released from liability I have I
think you receive this letter
from Xena Trust sometime ago and
and I thought it said it Senate
bast if I might just take a
minute and just read a couple
sentences we weighed the risk
and heard in serving as
corporate fiduciary and future
conservatorship cases against
the benefits of both the fee
perspective and in being able to
offer the services without the
ability to obtain normal
releases of liability it is just
become too risky and impractical
for Xena to continue serving in
that capacity this is
unfortunate because it is a
service that I think
we do well and could certainly
help meet the needs of the
community and I and I know that
you or I receive that that
letter so banks are no longer
acting as conspirators trust
companies are no lack longer
acting as conservators and I ask
as I was saying to you before I
ask a couple of my our partners
about that because they said
they feel that the reason some
people some entities are still
out offering trust services are
a conservative services is
because quite frankly because
they aren't aware of this
continuous liability.
Clear and and Mr I think it's
it's important that Mr Burton
was here testifying for this
provision because he's the
uniformed law so basically what
I'm hearing this is a non this
section he is a non uniform law
section that we stock in twenty
nineteen which which.
Again that in itself anytime
we've these uniform having you
know been here long time these
uniforms deals when we start
amending the uniformed mills
away from what they've done and
I can't where we were in twenty
nineteen again with the kind of
crisis that happened but what
I'm hearing though is that this.
You know you're creating as an
exception only for the situation
where the represented by
independent counsel they're not
represented by independent
counsel there and they're liable
still under this in perpetuity
Mr you Mr yes right yes and Mr
chairman the reason that was
drafted that way was that
Representative Daymon Ely and I
had worked with the courts or he
had worked with the courts to
try to come up with some
resolution on this and so the
initial idea was just to remove
the and so everyone wants to had
your current conservatorship
terminated then that would and
and your liability to a certain
extent would rather what we did
is we provided this information
that if you're represented by
independent counsel that that
would basically caught trigger
this release a liability.
So.
I think that's right I don't
have a lot to the I'm I guess
some.
I am.
but reduces losses to get
directed.
Yeah well that fit your.
Thank you I'm I'm and I'm not
understanding.
How this works.
This is the kind of all matters
as a what was chairman and
senator.
Paul what is that it comes.
Mr chairman
Representative I Senator Ivey
Soto it would be someone that is
your counsel your your lawyer
not a lawyer that spanned that's
been
it could be someone appointed by
the court in many many instances
that's the case but in the that
that would be council that is
represented that's representing
you the the independent council
that is prepping you the
protected person or an
interested party.
Mr Chairman what's the other
option.
the other option Mr chairman and
representative Senator Ivey Soto
is to basically remove all of
the so then you would basically
be where we were when we
initially enacted the probate
code we did not have a
subsection need so that would
basically say that everyone that
has basically every conservative
or that has been able to get the
conservatorship terminated
pursuant to the court order and.
The necessary notices that are
given to given to the interested
parties and to the protected
person at that point in time all
conservatorship survey sickly
free and clear from liability.
That's the way the law read read
before we put subsection the and
here in twenty nineteen.
The fact finders question I'll
ask you what's wrong with you
just suggested and if the with.
What.
You said independent counsel was
there's a lot of the
representative the concern over.
And I I
I what's the alternative.
Is Andrew with this not apply.
Just because I'm a lawyer they
can get off the hook and I don't
understand
I'm sorry Mister chairman
Senator what I meant is that the
plan the independent when the
interested party or the
protected person has the
independent counsel.
That's basically instructing
them and and basically looking
out for their best interest at
that point in time then
subsection you would basically
be would not have the
application and therefore you
could get a waiver of liability.
I guess my question is what part
of the town of New Mexico.
Then Mr chairman than the
alternatives areas that that
conservatory is has liability in
perpetuity.
Again I have a feeling or
sensation between consider.
The section between the two.
Well.
And what the last part up.
Just.
Yeah look at look at.
At.
The existing.
Yes Mr.
We reserve the right for second
that.
So this nonfederal ability.
You.
This was revised contract.
So contractors
The committee right Sir this is
this is the service of the level
of support.
I guess the community so.
I don't see much of the
community there anyway.
The
authors will through.
Right that's really years and
but but again I'm I'm trying to
figure out.
What a really.
And and that's why I'm also
trying to figure out.
What the less for tax.
Because honestly I'm not I'm not
following what the unless
perhaps.
Mr chairman
Center perhaps our regional idea
in doing this was to basically
make this section Unifor.
And in doing so if you remove
subsection the which we
originally intended to do and
then Representative Ely have met
with the courts and came up with
this unless provision but if you
if you think about it if you
remove the and it becomes then
that sections a uniform section
then all conservatives would be
basically in a position to not
being liable after the
termination is granted by the
court.
So this is current so this
language Representative Miller
yes just a really is a Mr on
I'm.
At
eight eight two three four right
and.
So it just takes a second.
Right.
Six.
Thank you.
Mr chair I wasn't here in two
thousand nineteen when this was
adopted by I feel like that was
probably adopted for for reasons
this language in section and
Is that I was looking up at the
we're talking about individual
liability of.
yeah Torrez and of course the
ministrations.
So hi and other protected
person.
Mr chair I have you as a lawyer.
Senator Wirth has been appointed
as my concern and he.
So just because I have you as a
lawyer.
He comes to me and says sign
this waiver of liability.
And then he goes and does all
sorts of nefarious stuff of mine
and state.
Just because I have have and
also have a lawyer.
He now is a muted from liability
for.
Doing doing that stuff on my
state that.
That might not I I don't know
this area and I wasn't here when
when you'll have system nineteen
but is that correct the I think
I yield to senator Wirth of and
you don't the staff but in my
you know I I guess that the
challenge Mr chairman and
senator do a is and I just keep
going back to the normal process
or I'm appointed as a court
appointed guardian Adlai item
for produce here eight and
basically.
I've obviously got.
Responsibilities to do under the
law I do them I apply to the
court personal representative to
do this all the time by the
court here's my accounting done
discharge me and this is to get
some fraud is found by the you
could go back and pull them in
within the statute of
limitations but I think the
question just becomes why.
Why we're going so far and I
mean the way that this drafted
now is that.
I think there's a good argument
persons never released you come
back the statue limitations
doesn't apply to court order
doesn't fly and so it really
does go and I think my my guess
is and this was then judge bacon
who was leading the charge on
this I mean this was in response
to the whole guardianship
conservatorship and it does feel
to me like this went too far and
they went to the point that no
one's willing to do the job then
that defeats the purpose because
we've gotta have people willing
to step up and be a conservative
you need the court to be
involved in need to have the
oversight
but again the way this is
drafted it does.
Eight the ease the without even
the bill creates challenges and
I get that and and the bill now
is trying to exempt the tiny
fraction of those that have
independent counsel I kind of
agree that doesn't work I think
that's what that once
interactions making them and
just take the south all together
but.
Mr chair I guess my question is
one if the because it's not.
It's not clear to me why someone
who is there to start by the
court.
I this means because when we get
those other discharge from the
court you're not executed a
waiver of liability along with
them that's not something that's
required to them just to
disruption so why would it be
required here such that not
allowing for waiver of liability
makes that liability now last
forever and just in these cases.
I don't I don't understand that
but I guess my other question is
have has actually happened to
anyone yet has there been anyone
who.
Was this chart and I understand
the this was is just since two
thousand eighteen not not not
all that long I have have we
seen this come back on any
server with this kind of
lingering liability after they
were discharged I of course
because a because I waiver of
liability was not executed.
Mr chairman as senator a
governor not aware of of that
but I think the more telling
thing is that I talked to a
number of years that weren't
aware this is on the books in
the first place.
which is always kind of you know
later discovered item of of
potential litigation so when you
think about it under the trust
code the trustees this is
basically just charged in a
similar fashion as we're
proposing here in the probate
code as well as a P. R. personal
representative and whatnot so
we're really not I think what's
important to remember is that
the two are changing nothing in
the appropriate code other than
the fact where we move into a
non and nine uniform provision
so all of those the trust the
public because it's been in
effect since nineteen I thanks
SMU sensitive documents chance
that I and I understand the
uniformity of stuff but I've
been a P. R. I've been
discharged I never have to
execute our labor of love.
In my discharge I don't I just
don't understand why we're
seeing that as a requirements.
Here.
Mr chair for the.
So one of motions and
Representative motion strict
currently on the motion.
Senator anyone else.
Right.
Looks like you're gearing up
this other month.
Sort of quick question.
This is yes.
This original and it.
To all.
We were witnessing Regis you
read that section so I'll just
wait to move back on.
Those emotions
The language is.
Request we were liability.
The person who decided that we
were our top of the page.
You have.
The proposed bill here and with
the person I.
We're.
But that's not surprising
B. as is almost always are.
Possibilities where.
We track out of contract between
us and I.
By.
Where we were last.
Alliance the one class.
Council Representative.
Us
It almost suggests that the one
percent the person conservative
representative in New Mexico
representative of you have the.
Just for the purpose.
Representative.
Where is the so socially if you
go back.
I.
Devices and I think the the the
the thing those good one is one
while posing motion the solution
for the committee.
I guess part of part of my
concern is as I try to dissect
the.
Even before the amendment.
Right it is nope that's not it
does conservatorship request we
were level.
No person shall request for your
receive release of or we were
reliability are denominated
public conservative.
What we have a waiver of
liability conservative
conservative well but that's
what I'd that's part of what I
can't figure out in reading the
is that it's not from a concert
with our.
It's
it it's right it's not Senator
considers shall request.
Police were liability it's not
person so request for your.
Please wait level have been on
the news of the conservative or.
An agent and a billion or
doesn't even Conservancy but
party act on behalf of the
system the conservative shall
not give.
Hey.
The release we provide.
This house right.
Okay Representative.
Thanks right that's that's the
part of our.
I'm not request of.
West of a conservative from.
Or someone acting on behalf of
the ocean.
So the so the person who's
giving the waiver is that
service.
Okay could you would you.
Okay you of the proposed reg
prepped I'm I'm going.
Oversee requests receive a
reduced rate so however due.
The.
Some
issues related economic.
Representative.
Over a request for your.
Whatever level of ages of.
So
Have.
Senator.
Reasons of.
Representative but there are
structured with the.
That's the beauty of it then.
They are asking someone to get
it.
Happen to.
As a matter of law.
Really so was liability on the
licensed independent counsel.
But that's just a fact person
give the waivers on company it
would be better than we just
simply send for.
The person other than a court.
General fund grant St release or
waiver of liability.
So that.
Well okay.
Get all.
The problem is though that we're
still gonna funding competent
person Representative dot com.
Recovery for some of the
position of having to.
Be able to.
Which I don't.
And and this doesn't state at
the end of the case.
You for all.
So governor first could be asked
to wait liability and to begin
with.
What is wrong.
But meanwhile a says there is a
level.
Unless you have.
Representative contract in the
conservative region.
Three eight right.
Right so that's why that's why I
say we should get rid of the
because.
Because it's it's not fair
processes task and confident
person to make a decision but if
if I have a first correct
decision at any time during the
conservatorship.
We will services so but we were.
So if you look existing patience
is being.
Service
level level of control property.
Rations only have a service
person with all these.
Well this over and re write it
the whole thing.
Will be an issue.
Well I'm not following care.
We're still in this motion force
right the.
I want to introduce.
I'm just trying to be clear you
know when you break down the
sentence removing down the movie
the independent counsel now
looking at a regional language.
This simplifying it with all the
stuff within the comments it's a
person asking a conservator or
agent for early release of
waiver of liability that's how I
read it I think that's what
you're trying to explain to us
the conservative
And so I think that I agree I I
understand what they're trying
to do with this language does
not work.
This doesn't work because it's a
person or any number of people
asking of a conservative they're
asking conservative or their
agent.
For that waiver of liability.
And that's not what we mean.
And so that that language does
not work I don't believe.
Excluding the land which now I
see what you're saying an
independent council could do it
but we're looking for for
protective protection we're
trying to protect the the person
is who are trying to protect.
I don't.
So I I would say you know
striking section me I I would
agree with it just because the
language is nonsensical to me.
But it would be better if this
paragraph or looked looked at
again re written in whole and
brought back I agree with
Senator Stewart.
Mr chair.
I'm confused by that I don't
understand this bill at all I
really don't.
This is All legalese to me when
the committee has no that's why
I said let's roll it over.
Mr.
Mr Chairman.
I might.
Good.
Suggestion appointment.
Raul.
Committee your.
For.
Is this right here we're going.
And we're.
The issue last.
That's absolutely correct Mr
chair that's absolutely correct
Mr chair.
Senator Wirth.
This.
Mr chair yes the the the the the
change was made
on the last page of the bill I
believe it basically now class
one electric bikes are in and
less a local government opts out
and and we moved class Senator
the last two bikes into the
category with class three so
they're out in less a local
government office in which I
mean that is the throttle bikes
are automatically going on a
look like passed by a local
government so as to.
To to do that if they'd like to
and that was this does address
it and I do think this budget
this is this is an important
bill given what's happening with
these it's hard to call bikes
anymore.
E. bikes.
Help.
The
most workers fifty three sixty.
But the question was whether.
With what we go through
authorize.
Right.
One of the three professionals.
You Mr chair Senator so
essentially on the on the left
bicycles that have the
capability to operate a high
risk either to be treated as a
mopeds essentially will the NMED
is going to have to decide what
they're going to do with them
but yeah at that is that's
that's a that's possibly what
they the N. B. D. will do with
that but I think the ability now
has a new classification and
they've got to decide which what
this bill does and decide what
they're gonna do what we do will
do with it Mr chair Senator
powerful pets treated currently.
I believe that they they are
required to register that
correct Mr turned over to my
experts that I believe they're
required to register.
Mr Chairman
Senator Pirtle
we have moved this super class
of the bikes with the new new
definition of electric mobility
device there now in the motor
vehicle code classified as a
motor vehicle.
Mopeds are classified as a motor
vehicle they have a definition
but it means simply they're
subject to a license plate and
registration and that's the same
thing that's going to happen now
with the super powerful quote
unquote electric the heights
that really are bicycles they're
going to be classified as motor
vehicles and they're going to be
subject to registration and
licensing but that's up to the
Mr chair Senator I think it's a
little easier with the gas
powers of.
Years or what have you because I
think it's like a fifty CC.
Right as to if you're fifty CC
in the low you have to do this
or forty nine below you have to
do one thing and then above it
is really going to speed per se
it's more of an of the motor you
can really determine what
somebody can do with some with
the scooter based upon the size
of the motor so I'm I I know
it's easier with the gas powered
is that kind of the goal here
yes breaking it down for by.
This Is again ability because of
elector motors and and work
differently than the old gas
powered.
Mr Chairman center pirtle that's
correct they're they're being
pushed in the category of motor
vehicle and there's all kinds of
motor vehicles that have
specific definitions.
Thank you.
But right.
I move a do not pass on Senate
bill sixteen ado passes Senate
Judiciary Committee substance
percent of sixty nine.
Two thousand
dollars.
The objections.
Of
course.
chair Senators photo centers we
were.
Members of this.
Boxer.
Sorry.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee.
The rest of the.
The most that is owned by the
conservative.
That's.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
The could you take one out of
order.
We use going also so would you
here but.
Thanks.
Thank you Mr make sure you have
a committee substitute.
Of.
For Senate bill.
One oh four well no you don't
you have amendment for Senate.
for Senate the.
Bill for for and what I've done
with this ammendment server is
The state this perfectly I have
gone to Senator Ivey Soto.
As my experts bill writer and I
have let him.
Charm of Bill into shape.
And I think if you will take a
little bit of time and I will I
will have to go through this
real quick but it takes up a lot
of the stuff that was subjected
both to you and earlier hearing.
And I think it's it should be
close to to what you like it
might be easier for you to do it
yourself the need to read it
out.
The the amendment is
Twenty two fifty seven sixty
four for one.
Purpose of the.
Close to the.
Got this just over the with
those one one place that the
loan from the discussions we
have internet.
This is number nine.
we're
this is a.
The.
Contract the list we paid.
I
believe it's right.
This is provided the repayment
contracted.
Those earlier than setting up a
three times of around us.
Right right right yeah we have
all of the all of these
language.
The pandemic.
That part of the but otherwise I
just figures are going to invest
All
of it so.
Silvercity.
Plus.
Set for.
Our.
The.
Those dresses.
The.
Yes yes we also from the
pharmacist thank you just
cancel.
Very few of.
This.
Revenues and office services or
losses were on the.
We know that we are supposed.
To us.
This issue here we also.
Those are the folks.
Appreciate.
About
the process.
Mr fix our question.
Awesome this this in addition to
the.
Yes it is following it which you
can say portion of their phone
or go over again and then again
this on top of it.
Public Education Department
issues these scholarships I
would really doubt that we have
enough money fact is we don't
have enough money to to issue
those kind of scholarships
double up on scholarships
presently so.
I need to actually add to money
into that line item for a car it
so with your question is it
possible is it yes it is
possible is a problem will no
Sir.
The finance committee I would
encourage you to get funding for
which she but before I just
never fully funded either one of
those programs right up.
Member to.
And for budget because we have
never funded.
We need to.
Mr chair agree with that.
We have not
further requirements.
Other questions.
US.
Whether.
Passes the main.
Or the services to serve on this
were block of course go to pass.
So give me some just one bit of
advice should I put this.
No.
Should the should I put this in
context before go to the floor
to questions.
Offering you so just uses of two
more related to the use of.
So the possibility of a tractor.
Thank you so.
But it is a massive forty hours
right thank you Sir.
Thank you very much.
At.
The.
This is for the committee
Michael right.
All of.
So.
In order to.
Bills the.
Right of.
Whether you're with the right
things over here but will
argument for the city.
There are two components to
register
online here is an overview for
our part of
the no Mr chair they're not.
So.
Well do centers all regulations
for a state.
Reserves part of that was there
for about.
Mister chair if the if let's go
ahead and as a safety net go
ahead and open that up that is
an opportunity for rebuttal I
don't think that I'll need the
full ten minutes.
my experts are ready to go ahead
and start the discussion after I
do the initial presentation of
the bill so what I'll do got
paid.
The.
Of
the five individuals the
opposition so
recently
I know we recognized a lot.
Happy about.
You got about the next the.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you committee I come to you
today because I think like you I
am heartbroken and tired of the
gun violence that is happening
in our country and our state we
are all well aware that their
parents who've lost their
children spouses who have lost
their husbands or wives and
partners kids who have lost
teachers in the list goes on.
Scene of someone you love via
any type of death is difficult
and traumatic the death of
someone because of an automatic
firearm or semi automatic
firearm or firearm capable of
accepting a large capacity
feeding devices life altering
and devastating devastating
because we know our society can
and should do something to keep
these weapons out of the hands
of people who intend to harm
others.
Problem here is that semi
automatic rifles are the weapon
of choice for mass shooters
because of the high efficient
at least effectively Saudi we're
seeing an increasing number of
mass shootings by those under
twenty one I'd like to give you
a couple of examples in two
thousand twelve and sandy hook
twenty six dead two injured when
a twenty year old shot and
killed twenty six people in two
thousand eighteen in parkland
Florida seventeen dead seventeen
injured a nineteen year old
opened fire on students and
staff at Marjory Stoneman
Douglas high school in twenty
twenty two in buffalo New York
tended three injured as an
eighteen year old live stream
part of the attack on social
media.
In twenty twenty two and you've
all the Texas eighteen injure
eighteen injured twenty one dead
an eighteen year old gun then
we'll we will be in an A. R.
fifteen style rifle killed
nineteen children and two
teachers rob elementary school
you've all the it was the
deadliest school shooting since
twenty children and six adults
were killed at sandy hook and
then on August third two
thousand nineteen it was my
birthday it was a Saturday
morning my luxury on my birthday
is that I get to sleep in
because those of you who know me
know that I do not like to get
up early but I woke up to the
news that there was a mass
shooting at the Silvis to
Walmart and I'll pass it which
is the town that I grew up and.
Twenty three people and were
killed and twenty two were
injured and although the shooter
turned exactly twenty one turned
twenty one exactly a week before
that day on July twenty seventh
he legally purchased a semi
automatic rifle and a thousand
rounds of hollow point
ammunition online in June of
twenty nineteen he was twenty
years old.
Senate bill one sixteen
establishes a minimum age of
twenty one to purchase a prevent
possess an automatic firearm
semi automatic firearm or
firearm capable of accepting a
large capacity feeding device in
New Mexico you can purchase
these types of missile weapons
at nineteen you have to be
twenty one to purchase a
handgun.
Senate bill one sixteen includes
exemptions these are someone
under the age of twenty one who
attends a hunter safety course
for another firearm safety
course.
uses the automatic or semi
automatic firearm for target
shooting engages in organized
competition using these firearms
engages in legal hunting or
trapping activities is on
private property or under the
supervision of a parent or a
grandparent or legal guardian
and the bill does not apply to
law enforcement officers are
active duty reserve members of
the armed forces who are trained
in using these weapons.
My experts today Maranda School
who's co president of New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
she's on my left to my right is
a blue Lee who is legal counsel
for every town or dot org and at
this point I look forward to the
discussion Mr chairman
committee.
They're willing to go ahead and
start the conversation Mr chair.
The rules for.
One of
the following orders.
What was the numbers.
Representative.
Your the
forward.
Over the last you.
We've just.
President.
The HSD those.
Issue of.
That would cover it.
Opposite.
He shared with.
Yeah.
Right this bill.
What I'm sorry Sir through the
years of talk as I did thank you
for taking right Sir you have of
course with the right of what we
like we're going to classify
built here Los Wednesdays three
years of your do your bill or
not very much.
I just want to recall these
someone eighteen to twenty one
hundred so called highest rated
they have all responsibility.
Not all of.
All this is the right to be
He did by back issues requests
from.
This is the right.
Don't.
Well I contracted very a lot of
other things this is.
This is the right.
On the
The the
Yes fiscal impact.
You guys read this.
Talk about it on page three the
record up.
Sen rand corporation the service
for the research on this.
That is a lot of modern
evidence.
Our.
To reduce suicides.
There's a.
It is evidence the position of
our.
These people.
Suicide.
Yeah thank you Lucy evidence.
Are
you aware of this case of.
Thank you for.
That is also the individuals we
had us to speak in opposition to
four Ellen Peterman for you
here.
Zoom is very recognize for up
to.
Services of I just had sex from
Senator to sign up for.
Hi this is Ellen Peterman.
Choose it register.
That Texans are registered
will be other people opposition.
But if it is of this is like a
problem this is the dogs in the
family stuff.
Well well.
There is still there.
Yes I am.
The firm have.
Hi I standing in favor of this
bill as a member of New Mexicans
prevent gun violence and also
the travel available specialist
then national institutes of
health is a document along with
many other people that that
adolescent brain is not fully
developed and the last part of
the brain development of the
prefrontal cortex which is
indeed is responsible.
In making planning strategizing
without that complete
development teams are often
chrome not all of them that many
making rash and impulsive
decision which can lead to
obviously faster results as we
just mentioned so it is
incredibly important that we do
not allowed to have firearms and
some people would say that while
they have them in the military
but there is an issue with you
where they are supervising their
also benefited from mental
illness so I heard you for those
reasons and based on the science
of brain development what's
happening with them that we
passes bills to keep not only
our children safe but also those
those young adults who are under
twenty one who if they make an
impulsive decision but will
really suffer such consequences
for the rest thing yes on this
bill thank you.
Are you with us.
Four of.
Right so
I'm gonna take the frog of the
chair to recognize some of the
opposition we have a deadline
the registration on located
act requiring a
three twenty one this afternoon
late.
The card is time to recognize
additional opposition so
National rifle association
ask for donations Russia's
forces phonation Mexico and Rose
Bowl registered
I will recognize you should be
able to the end of.
One of forty eight dollars on if
you're with other insurance.
Mr chair committee members terra
mention
Thank you.
Senator Wirth
Terry Mitchell registered
lobbyist for the national rifle
association in opposition to
Senate bill one sixteen the long
list of exceptions in the bill
highlights why tens of thousands
of minors and young adults who
are New Mexicans is a cease fire
arms and actually own them as
well
what are currently goal owners
of these firearms are under
twenty one supposed to do with
their property of this bill
takes effect especially if there
are emancipated minors that was
an issue that we kicked around
the house bill nine the other
night specifically there's no
general exception for minors
young adults possessing these
firearms for self defense for
defense of another defensive
property defense of livestock
position in these cases is only
allowed if it occurs while on
private property under the
control of and while supervised
by the person's parent
grandparent or legal guardian
guardian.
farm transfers to minors and
young adults to to death and
inheritance are not exempted
from this bill the gifting of
firearms to this demographic is
likely prohibited is well
possession by a minor or young
adults not have to be knowing
for crime to occur if you
compare this with the language
of NMSA thirty dash seven dash
two dot two.
Unlawful possession of a handgun
consists of a person knowingly
having a handgun in the person's
possession or knowingly
transporting a handgun we think
there are some structural
problems with the exceptions
that they don't equally apply to
subsections one B. and one C.
which are different offenses
with that all wrap up and feel
the rest of my time.
Thanks.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm Daryn list sort
with the national shooting
sports foundation we are the
firearm industry trade group and
Mr chairman I appreciate your
concern about the
constitutionality of some these
proposals it is important that
we do teach the next generation
that the constitution is there
to limit government power no
matter how attractive some of
these proposals might be I did
want to address the three things
the Supreme Court has told us
over the last fifteen years
about the second amendment and
how they relate to this bill
first is the plain text of the
constant of the secondment cover
the individuals conduct if it is
is constitutionally was
presumptive this constitutional
so.
First the plain language the
plain text of the second
amendment says in the operative
clause the right of the people
to keep and bear arms shall not
be infringed young adults age
eighteen twenty are considered
people were part of for a person
or part of the people in the
first second fifth ninth and
tenth amendments they have the
right to vote their party to
contract and they can serve and
armed forces there is no reason
to view them as an exception
here is there any historical
precedent or tradition for a
proposal like this there is none
there is no tradition associated
with banning the possession or
acquisition of long guns by
young adults some people may
point to the handgun ban there's
right now a federal law that
prohibits eighteen to twenty
year olds purchasing handguns
that was passed in nineteen
sixty eight that was one hundred
and seventy seven years after
the bill of rights was ratified
it's a long time if I had to bet
that band is probably going to
fall soon certainly the only way
the Supreme Court would allow
that band the stand is if there
were alternatives long guns in
common use available to that age
group finally the third point is
whether these firearms are
protected are they in common use
so are we track manufacturing
numbers for the civilian market
and since nineteen ninety there
been a hundred and forty four
point five million semi
automatic rifles produced for
this civilian market that's just
since nineteen ninety the first
semi automatic long gun was
produced for the civilian market
in nineteen oh three so we have
a gap of eighty seven years in
our data we can safely assume
they're a hundred million
semiautomatic long guns in
possession right now instability
in market so are they in common
use I think that's well
established and finally over the
last hundred twenty years of
their possession finally I'd
like to ask for the committee
yes I will Sir I would like.
To ask the committee table the
bill for the constitutional
grounds I mentioned and for the
practical purposes that Terry
just mentioned then alright
thank you.
Ellery is.
Are you there.
Yes.
Your for the rest of forces on
the need to recognize that the
two minutes please.
Thank you Sir.
Server computers having
difficulties one second.
My name is Alex Williams and I'm
knocking on state assistant
manager for the congressional
sportsmen's foundation I'm
testifying today in opposition
of Senate bill one sixteen
banning the purchase and
possession of semi automatic
rifle shop and Senator passing
magazines for individuals under
twenty one would be extremely
detrimental to current efforts
to recruit retain and reactivate
hunters and recreational
shooters outburst forty
community artery programs often
focus on getting nontraditional
demographics engage in our time
honored traditions the
purchasing and possession
restrictions Senate bill one
sixteen we have a
disproportionately negative
impact on individuals who want
to get involved in hunting or
recreational shooting but do not
have the community ties for
personal relationships to be
able to borrow a rifle or
shotgun little practice one to
go hunting for recreational
shooting further marginalizing
nontraditional participation in
the outdoors Furthermore Senate
bill one sixteen would
effectively disallow anyone
under the age of twenty one from
utilizing public finance
transportation listen I
automatic rifles and shotguns
Paul this is of little concern
to those who have access to
shooting ranges and private
lands those individuals under
twenty one or eight hundred
twenty one who are liable for
for public lands for target
shooting would be prohibited
from those activities just the
one sixteen would also reduce
funding for conservation through
DTC crease contributions the
provider this act which directs
excise taxes on firearms
ammunition archery equipment to
be used for wildlife
conservation purposes last year
the US fish and Wildlife Service
this first one point five
billion dollars in total funding
to the state for wildlife
conservation in which one point
one billion was directly tied to
taxes paid by the firearm
ammunition industry by
prohibiting individuals under
twenty one from purchasing semi
automatic rifles shotguns
Senator Cassie magazine it's a
really restricting their ability
to possess the same items this
will reduce the amount of
funding available from all
across the state this is of
critical importance New Mexico.
Mexico as ninety eight percent
of the department payment issues
budget is comprised of sportsmen
and women generated dollars
therefore any more years or
disincentive to hunter.
Listening.
For.
S. opposition to that user.
Earlier.
Now Mr chair we're ready for the
committee the question.
That figure sure thank you
senator and I just and I'm not
going to dive into a cell and it
was a new set this Mr chair
wasn't Senator and what wasn't
anyone this world.
One of the people call in and
see where those who serve in the
military as having mental
problems.
And I want to push back against
that partially your bill you
know I'm gonna vote against it
had an exemption for those who
are training those men and women
who fought bravely for our
nation and it was and you said
it was someone else but anyone
else who is saying that I
strongly questions yes that that
kind of language is saying just
because you're in the military
you have an issue with mental
health issues and I I just want
to the future be on record
saying that was inappropriate
and I usually don't make
comments about people who are
comments online but I just
wanted to for strongly questions
that this to chair thank you
senator Lucien thank you.
All of the committee that some
of the comments that were made.
were seemingly in reference to
the original introduced bill we
do have committees of industry
we will have a motion for
adoption of.
Senator Pirtle of them
Do it.
Me just a minute I was not aware
of us.
Binder.
Mr chair I'm not aware of a
committee sept either no Mr
chair.
Well.
Six years.
I mean I I do.
We should.
I did it came from the council
service.
Debate over this one.
Possible.
So we're we're doing with the
bill we're doing
about twenty so
Senator Pirtle.
Chair thank you senator
There's lots of issues that that
I have.
With this bill like.
Looking at page to line to
it's.
We're talking about exemptions.
Yes the person may possess such
a farm when the person attends a
hunter safety course or other
firearm safety course is the
intent that once somebody
received this adequate training
on on firearm safety that then
they can process it was only
while they're going through the
safety training.
Mr chair committee let my
experts Louis Lee answer that.
Mr chair committee I think the
purpose of this exemption is to
allow for the temporary
possession to participate in
that hunter safety course.
So Mr chair Senator we expect
people to it never touched a
firearm before and then somehow.
Just magically know what to do
with a firearm in in a training
course.
Well as Mr chair committee I I
think that would be the the
purpose of participating in the
course and and Mr chair and
senator.
When people go to do their
driver's ed is that the first
time they've ever seen a vehicle
or are they familiar with the
vehicle perhaps driven on a dirt
road with pops or like me I was
driving full time a time I was
nine years old
I mean I I I just see a few
issues there where we're saying
basically we don't expect you to
ever handled this far but now I
want you to safely and
adequately be able to do so
without any type of prior one on
one with with an adult so Mr
chair committee I respectfully
disagree with that I think that
some of the exceptions
enumerated allow for minors to
engage with these firearms prior
to signing up for hunter safety
course especially on private
property and with adult
supervision.
And Mr chair I I do see that
that that part but you're
expecting people to just have
tons of private property
you know I I just see a lot of
issues with that I mean not
everybody's a landowner and I do
appreciate some protection for
landowners such as myself but I
I don't I don't know that it.
Gives that flexibility that was
intended all next move on page
two line eighteen it says
engages in legal hunting or
trapping activities does that
include game animals non game
there's tons of.
Species out there that are not
game animals that you can
technically hunt year round is
that intended or we only
intending to include actual game
animals.
Mr chair and committee I am not
the person who is an expert on
New Mexico's hunting laws.
Mr chair committee I I can't
answer that question center for.
Thank you Mr Mr chair Senator
that does give me pause
jackrabbits or something back in
the day we would readily.
Be able to just go help the
local rancher take care of his
overpopulation coyotes as well
so the way I read it would
include those because they are
game animals
neither are agents or blackbirds
other things that as kids we
always enjoy.
Taking care of over population
so I I think there's a little
bit of problem there with that
language
Mr chair and senator do you mind
referring to because if you look
on page two this includes
engages in legal hunting or
trapping activities and Mr chair
Senator the the question is does
that include non game animals so
you have different
classifications of things with
your game animals object of a
permit for seasons for trapping
is one that although it's a
large time frame it year round
but then you have priorities
you're more of your pest animals
that you can legally hunt as a
resident jackrabbits coyotes
pigeons those types of animals
that are classified as a game
animals that that there's no
limit no time you can
spotlight and do different
things whatever you need to to
to help.
Control of yes we see so I'm
just concerned that maybe that's
excluding that which is an
important tool for for ranching
and farming communities
and then my other issues on page
three and subsection E. it talks
about because of the semi
automatic firearm or.
Firearm capable of accepting a
large capacity feeding device
was it intended to include bolt
action rifles that might hold
more than ten rounds I'm.
Mr chair and committee no.
This this is a semi automatic
firearm and it.
It no manual action or bold
action rifle is is included in
this definition.
In in the revenue share
respectfully read it differently
just because of the way
the paragraph is is composed it
is unlawful to knowingly sell or
transfer ownership of an
automatic firearm one the semi
automatic fire two or firearm so
that's all capable of accepting
a large capacity magazine so
that could be any fault action
rifle that could hold more than.
The magazine so at least I know
was it your intent to do it that
way but that is definitely how
it's written and could be
construed so that definitely
causes some concern for me
obviously Mr chair page four of
ten rounds ammunition large
capacity I'm just gonna have an
issue with that no matter what
we try to do there in my last Mr
chair and and senator is the
severability clause spikes
spirits that's not necessary.
So I'm not really sure why we
would include that of with the
courts provide certain sections
eight they can pick and choose
just left up to the point of I'm
not sure that that's necessary
but that is all I have Mister.
Thank you Mr chair
Have a question on page two.
One of these of the exceptions
have someone who practices for.
Are states in a practice for
performance.
I I a one seat three what what
is the point of that exception.
Mr chair Senator I'll go ahead
and let my expert Marin is going
to go ahead into the.
Chairman of the committee I
think that's because sometimes
they're nonprofits who have the
shooting sports organizations or
competitions.
Okay and and I guess my question
is.
Wired just nonprofits who have a
shooting competition excluded in
here.
At I guess what what is it happy
in on profit that that that
makes it that at.
An exception right in there.
Mr chair committee I imagine
it's because the nonprofit is
likely to be educational and
purpose and this is an exception
that covers a young people.
Okay.
Seven
So because we're dealing with
this this.
Row indecision which I think
it's crazy I think it's crazy to
say if you don't have a law
didn't have a long and seventeen
hundreds
but that is the Supreme Court
that we have whether whether I
agree with that or not so why it
are there examples of historical
laws that regulate age around
firearms that will give us some
comfort as to the
constitutionality here Romero.
Mr chair committee yes there are
examples of historical laws that
regulate firearm ownership fired
use fired Carrie in particular
for for teenagers these laws are
very old so the age limits
looked a little bit different
back then I am not particularly
well equipped to talk about you
know a list of historical
examples but I will say that it
is every tons position that this
age restriction is defensible
even under Bruins historical and
textual yes.
Thank you Mr chair at.
I don't know forever we're going
to get to this up.
And then I call on hold off on
the moment.
Until we get to probably want to
stick together.
Anyone else.
thank you Mr chair I I do want
to.
Just make a couple comments
about the constitutionality
issue in the brewing decision
and I noted one of the gentleman
who stood up in opposition.
Start is COVID with if I had the
best.
And my take away from the
presentation that we did in this
committee was the courts are all
over the place even though
brewing has.
Kind of Clarence Thomas's sent a
signal there also was a
concurrence by two of the.
Cavanaugh and Roberts in that
case which I think.
Left the door open for a
construction and I as we look at
these bills I just think we have
to be careful to remember that
we are the state legislature and
more state legislative branch.
No question that that the
constitution is there I remind
this committee when we had the
whole tech bill in this
committee we talked a lot about
thinking all this is probably
gonna get preempted but as a
state legislature we made a
policy decision to put that move
that bill forward out of this
committee and that will most
likely be litigated I think we
can all agree that if we pass
these bills they're going to get
litigated but that shouldn't
stop us from doing what I think
we were elected to do just a
legislators and so I.
I certainly.
You know understands.
And I agree with senator do X.
comments about you know this is
Stewart Cole interpretation and
trying to go down that wormhole
but to the extent that the
sponsors of the bill believe
that you know that there are
historical precedents for doing
that to me that's enough for us
to kind of.
Do the analysis that we should
do make a policy decision that
we need to make on a bill like
this and.
You know as as a variety of
different courts and different
circuits are all struggling with
this I really think New Mexico
has a chance to to kind of be a
leader and push and there's
nothing wrong with that even as
a lawyer who respects that point
of time I clerk for the tenth
circuit court of appeals and I
can distinctly remember the
judge actor for all of our staff
coming in one time and saying
you know.
This is the law that we're kind
of working with but this just
doesn't feel right let's figure
out a way to make this work and
and and so again I just I I want
to state that because I feel
like.
You know as we have these
discussions we have to be
careful I mean obviously this is
the Judiciary Committee were
lawyers and I I respect you know
the president and what that
means.
What do we really know what that
means and I just if I had to
that.
And and and my take away my take
away from the from the hearing
which I really appreciated in
this committee was things are
all over the place and circuits
are all over the place and and
imports are doing different
things and ultimately each of
these issues has to go up in a
circuit court you know will make
a decision nationally and then
we decide we we see if the
Supreme Court wants to take the
case and so what I understand
from our analysis that some
cases you know some states have
laws that have been overturned
by certain point and so I'm I'm
respectful of that as well but I
just think that as I'm trying to
analyze these I guess.
You know on reluctant to just
pretend I'm on the Supreme Court
as a lawyer's practice for
thirty plus years.
Again I would hope we get good
lawyers a can go convince those
two justices in concurrence that
you know this goes too far this
is this should be allowed the
state should be allowed to go in
this area so I just want to make
those comments as we as we get
into this and.
And I just think it's important
to kind of lay that out as we
all do the do the analysis on
the various bills so thank you
Mr chair.
Sorry Mr Mr chair committee may
have an opportunity to respond
to this.
Question for you to leave the
rude but you were just a
question.
Senator Baca issues basic.
Which is a public.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I I share your concerns
with violence ages
I think that hello and I
continue to believe that guns
are the source of the problem
it's us you know different
social effects that affect
people's behavior for there's a
weapon there is a will there
will be violence so you know
we're moving
economic setting that can mean
anything want to touch the one
on the brewing decision and and
and especially what was said
earlier about about people.
and you know I under under a
constitutional
construct people.
Has eighteen and twenty one year
old so eighteen to twenty one
year olds have been regarded as
P..
People have the right to bear
arms now you know I would with
respect to the good senator to
my left here that you know in
his concerns I I I I I I we've
had this discussion many times I
guess where I come out and it is
how far over the line is it to
constitutionality and I think
it's way over the line Texas
just had a case like this if
only it had to do handguns you
have to do with rifles and
rifles are much more well
established Mr chair as firearm
that's been protected by our
constitution for a long period
of time
this have to do with handguns in
eighteen to twenty year old that
was carrying it outside and and
that was overturned in the tenth
tenth circuit and that law that
particular instance was much
less aggressive I would say
attempting here and so you know
in that regard that that I think
it would not pass that muster
the other idea that I have here
and I'll ask you a question Mr
chair and senator does this
exempt veterans from caring
veterans aged eighteen to twenty
one from buying firearms
receiving firearms
possessing firearms.
Mr chair committee and there is
an exception for active reserve
members of the armed forces the
Army National Guard that.
For the I had National Guard New
Mexico.
So I I see your question is
about veterans in particular.
So the answer that there is.
Sure.
at the moment Mister chair and
committee it doesn't
distinctively say that but I
would be open to recognizing
those groups.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that suggestion
appreciate that because that
that in particular for me I am a
veteran that that.
That they are not excluded
actually offends me and and and
here's why I'll give you a
scenario
you can go abroad serve overseas
the discharge be discharge with
the disability that you came in
combat come back here after
receiving that and not be able
to.
Put by a fire are after your
country is asked that if you I
think I think that's incredible
that the other thing that I
think is incredible as as long
as we have a draft in place and
an ability in the military Mr
chair to carry a firearm and
you're eighteen years of age
that's when you go in I I signed
the papers when I was seventeen
the I immediately got called out
to the Persian Gulf in there I
went
it it.
It doesn't seem logical and it
seems a bit hypocritical and I'm
not calling you this word the
concept to me though it sounds
that way we can ask Mr chair
these people to take up and bear
arms to go into foreign lands to
protect this country yes
we can that we can call on them
but if we don't call on them
those same people.
Cannot slide and bear arms here
I I don't like to expanding
those classes that way and so
all the that discussion at that
Mr chairman I'll go over a few
other issues structurally that
with this bill that that that I
see
one of them is has already been
flagged by Senator Pirtle here
on page two I see a little bit
differently than has is but the
exemption is for engaging in
legal hunting or trapping
activities I know you didn't
intend this for you simply
excused any person for carrying
these weapons any time because
non game species can legally be
hunted twenty four seven in the
state
and those are for bears rabbits
squirrels what have you ninety
eight and so as long as somebody
make that click claim this
really wouldn't cover that the
other the other item again going
down the page title seven of
your exact if you're on private
property under control the
person's parent grandparent
legal guardian so I could see of
an issue here where you know I'm
a twenty year old and I live
about two in more removed area
down where I live state
metal Laker out there and now
you know what am I gonna do call
my mommy to come in and watch
you shoot my gun I I guess
because I can't do it on my own
property I can own property but
I can't fire my own weapon on on
my own property but I can fired
on their property or under their
supervision somewhere you know
so I have the I guess an issue
that
moving on to page three looking
at item C. you know for
distinguishes a large capacity
feeding device for for economic
in is capable of firing these
rounds and and point that would
be unlawful Mexico over your
definition here for I'm off for
a large capacity by.
And we see in there and go
through the whole thing and
large capacity feeding device
means in honoring the whole
thing to but essentially under
spring pressure and then goes to
a list of stuff for could be
readily restored or converted to
accept more than ten rounds so
let's look at and this is in
order okay so it doesn't have to
have ten rounds as to have these
items or ten rounds so let's we
can all count one of them go ten
rounds let's look at the under
spring pressure under with this
you have excluded.
Almost every shot gun I can pick
of you've excluded bolt action
rifles that are spring fed
through a magazine that can only
take three cartridges at a time
so even if I have a three a
cartridge magazine to sticking a
rifle that is bolt action still
under spring pressure it is
that's what loads it pushes it
up as you pull it through and so
that in in essence would be the
legal this bill as well we we
talked about the veteran so not
to go over that again I decide
to cover that first
the other thing is item medium
page three so unlawful to
knowingly okay so we have a
legal Senator seller transfer
ownership of an automatic
firearm so so I guess what I do
there Mr chair is I just don't
ask for ID or some proof and and
then I don't know
you know and so we're we're
leaving this requirement on
someone to establish someone's
age or they could be and you
know enough trouble there and
there's there's other I'm not
gonna go on much further Mr
chair I know we have time
constraints here but there are
other structural issues within
this bill that you know just
have problems and I think
conceptually it has problems
with structurally as problems
and constitutionally it has
problems and it's been stated by
quite a few years so I'll just
leave it at that Mr chair thank
you for your time thank you for
being here and answer the
questions that I ask I truly
appreciate it.
Very much
The the problem that I see with
this bill is is the possession.
Particularly when you do a lot
of analysis.
The.
Well the age of majority.
Well the.
Well they've already today.
Is.
It's clearly.
For most purposes Hey take.
The age of a Jordi.
on seventeen ninety one was
twenty one.
However.
Total funding of our of our
Republic.
There were many loss.
That.
That talk about who would be in
the militia.
Which gets to the meaning of the
second amendment.
And those laws at that time
included people between the age
of fact.
So in some cases every male.
between the ages of eighteen and
forty five.
and so.
And so I on a on a Heller.
Creating an analysis.
Of the possession aspect of this
bill.
Yes.
And.
And so.
And the
In fact that in fact in and not
only in Heller plant in Miller.
and then
And even going all the way back
to nineteen thirty nine.
The U. S. Supreme Court has
recognized that the founding the
militia was generally understood
to be comprised of all able
bodied men.
Then within those age ranges and
beginning at age.
between the ages of eighteen and
twenty five or forty five even
though.
That was that was not a
Your ability to put Jordy
started later that in fact we
have the.
The it's it's a you know we have
the
seventeen ninety two Melissa at
that talk about that as well.
So.
So we've got.
There's there's actually I think
ample law that indicates.
That the session aspect of this
bill is unconstitutional and my
question is is there any.
Is there any port that is public
health a possession will all.
between eighteen and twenty one.
Well I I don't.
I'm so sorry Mr chair and
committee I I don't think that
any court has yet using the brew
and analysis
Any circuit court has struck
down possession regulations
based on age there is a District
Court opinion in Texas which
relates to the carrying of
firearms handguns eighteen to
twenty out which was referenced
by another member.
And I was chairman of the house.
Representative because I always
beneficial thank you misli.
Right and that was not state
taxes so as not to appeal that's
correct.
Right but the but my question is
has the report.
So we've still got work that is.
That is found unconstitutional a
professional between eighteen
and twenty.
The court found constitutional a
possession all between eighteen
and.
Mr chair and committee the
litigation under Bruin because
the case is so new is still very
much pending that Texas court
decision came out really quickly
and is you know settled into
somewhat expeditious way by the
fact that the state decided to
withdraw its appeal so I would
the way I think about it is that
federal district courts and
certainly no circuit court they
have not yet had the opportunity
to uphold these regulations but
I will say that you know under
federal law there's a twenty one
year old age limit for
purchasing handguns there are
over twenty two states that have
some variation of it of age
regulations.
At at this chairman of.
center in this league.
No I I think I think it's I
think a purchased along with the
with the cost of I'm not
proposition.
Sure that Mr chair and committee
as I said there is no court
decision that yet
applies the permanent houses to
second amendment challenge on
age restrictions because that.
I said it came down less than a
year ago.
and and I mean I'm I'm presuming
that you are familiar with the.
Fires policy coalition.
K..
Mr Chairman.
I'm sorry Mr chairman that is an
committee is that the tax case
okay.
Yes yes.
Where do you take exception with
the analysis in that.
So.
I'm not perfect I'm sorry Mr
chair and committee I'm not
prepared to discuss that opinion
detail I will say that that case
was about carrying handguns in
public eighteen to twenty that
was not
That policy is not squarely
what's before this body today
this is about a purchase and
possession regulation of semi
automatic firearms automatic
firearms and firearms that can
accept large capacity magazines
so we're talking about different
weapons and a different purpose
for the H. regulation but what I
will say is that the Bruin yes
which is a tax history and
tradition yes it's there has not
been a you know a ton of
guidance from the Supreme Court
itself certainly not from any
circuit courts applying
applying that test on.
How which which historical
analogues you include which you
exclude and for what reasons
I will also note as Senator
Wirth explained before that the
brew and.
Results rests in large part on a
concurrence in in the
concurrence Justice Cavanaugh
said
neither this opinion nor
district of Columbia versus
Heller is a regulatory straight
jacket for regulatory carte
Blanche there's room for a
variety of gun regulations.
but I do not.
That.
Our illustrious sentencing
commission see this is likely.
To be challenged R. J. generals
is likely Jon Boller defenders
offices like to be challenged
administrative office of the.
District fourteen has as being
likely to be challenged of.
And
Yeah.
It's the like I said it's not
for me it's the if the present
is the purchase aspect of it.
Percentage of which I I.
Likely to to sustain.
What's in a the challenge.
The possession of it I guess I'm
asking misli of the seven
sponsor this late.
To.
This we not the terms of what I
would like to do but that
legally we're on solid ground.
Not speculative.
In terms of doing a restriction
on.
Mr chair and committee.
As I've said before these laws
and other kinds of gun
regulation.
Shares so Mister chair committee
these laws are defensible I
believe and it is the position
of every town for gun safety
that these laws are defensible
under Bruins yes
In the same way and just as
senator Wirth said that you know
things are are very much up in
the air.
I I think it's it's wrong to
assume that court which strike
down this law.
Based on Berlin's yes I think
it's safe to assume that you
know any state that engages in
gun safety policy making is
opening itself up to litigation
that's a reality whether the
what result will come from that
is is very much no and I'm
seeing in different kinds of
other regulations not
specifically age but there are
favorable District Court
opinions for example on
on assault weapons prohibitions
so this burden yes is very
unpredictable and I don't think
it's correct anyone who says
that there's a certain result
that's guaranteed by it.
I I I just don't think that's
correct I think that there's
going to be many years of
litigation and we're going to
need to wait for circuit courts
to weigh in and that's going to
take quite a bit of time.
So I appreciate the policy.
Of exploration I was asking
really legislation.
At the end of.
Policy wise I'm on board legally
I'm not.
In terms of regulating
possession.
So Mister chair committee as a
pointed to earlier I do believe
that there are some historical
analogues for regulating.
Possession I'm not prepared to
talk about you know a list of
those laws today but I do know
that states across the country
are defending you know with full
briefing at the laws and gun
safety policies that they put
forth including those under age.
We do believe this chairman
service leave you do believe
existence are operated is
because what goes on.
So Mr chair and committee I am
not in the position of
litigating on behalf of states
but part of my office is I do
know that states and
municipalities and other bodies
of government that passes
regulations do defend them in
court with ample briefing.
I I'm so sorry Mr chair twenty I
cannot predict how the court
would rule but I can say that
these laws are defensible.
at.
Up Mr chairman and this leads.
of the of the of the firearms
that we seek to restrict here.
Are there any here that are not
regulated by the national
firearms act
yes I'm sorry Mr chairman
committee yes.
What are not regulated by the
and semi automatic handguns.
And semi automatic rifles.
Have safe automatic firearms.
Out of the semi automatic okay
but the rest of them are
regulated by the national parks
right Mr chair and committee
S. program and the national
firearms under the national
firearms act.
If someone was to purchase.
Economic
that is that is regulated by the
national firearms act.
what is the process of federal
offices.
Mr chair committee.
It's my understanding.
That I I don't know about
purchasing new automatic weapons
I do know that under the
national firearms act owners of
automatic weapons that were
owned I think prior to nineteen
eighty six the owner has to
register that fire with the ETF.
Correct right but in order to
your purchase of a firearm
regular finance firms and.
Well for for with the with that
fee for.
Seven Representative of
permission to to purchase a gun
was regulated by the national
farmers and so Mr chair and
committee I think are you.
Is this about other firearms
that are not automatic firearms
that are regulated by the
national firearms act chairman
miss Leigh I'm talking about
just ours Act and those that are
regulated by the national sure
so and Mr chairman committee as
I understand it the national
firearms act regulates short
barreled rifles automatic
firearms that's not it's not
just not the covers automatic
firearms it is my understanding
that automatic I I know the
regulations that apply for
automatic firearms that were in
ownership prior to nineteen
eighty six
I'd I don't know what the
processes were or what the
particular forms are for
registering.
Okay well it and I think it's
significant events and and we
did we need to the fact that
regulated by the next firearms
act it'll.
For for for the with that the if
you're gonna buy regulated which
we everything here except for a
some of the some Act and and
four point gonna be filled up
anybody under the age twenty
one.
So Mr at.
Then and so
we've got probably got a federal
law.
Discuss letters assessors also
runs right.
We got federal law where the
where the penalty FOR illegal
purchase requisition of eight of
a firearm on the national
firearms act is ten years.
we've got a state law.
Where is somebody.
Purchase.
Such a hopeful economic.
And I definitely treat age of
eighteen and twenty one by
definition it would be.
I guess so.
We're making it the three
hundred sixty four day.
Prime.
Where is the fence they get
paid.
A ten year.
Rob.
I see you look at.
With the thank go ahead please
of the gentleman.
Sure Mr chairman committee
acknowledge that there wasn't a
question but so but I don't
think New Mexico authorities you
know police authorities in New
Mexico can enforce the federal
law that regulates the
possession of regulated weapons
under the national firearms act
so
I'm sensing that Senator Ivey
Soto you might be suggesting
that this bill is duplicative of
things that are already covered
by the national firearms act but
what this bill could do is
provide legal authority for law
enforcement in New Mexico to
enforce a new ad New Mexico
statutes.
Mr chairman and
Center and Lee I understand that
but but in our federal statute.
where first of all it would.
Percent of the time the legal.
Under the under the federal law.
for anything that's regulated by
the NMAA.
And and where the I don't see.
If.
Our offer for more aware of that
they can turn over the past.
And the building would be ten
years before they can take
themselves to the penalties
through support.
I'm trying to figure out how
we're how we're actually just
waiting in the.
That.
Sure Mr chair and committee.
There are examples of things
that are regulated under federal
law that only federal law
enforcement can actually enforce
around strop purchasing
is is what's such simple where
it's very useful for state to
have their own strop purchasing
crimes so that state at state
law enforcement can can target
that and punish it and so that
they're not only left relying on
the ETF to regulate transfers
that
included you know someone lying
on a background check so I.
In response to a question
Senator Ivey Soto it's not so
much the thing that's changing
is the ability to enforce this
provision on the ground in New
Mexico by New Mexican law
enforcement and I've been Mr but
it was late in terms of
purchasing and I'm always in
that as a virtue I do see that
we're too I am concerned at the
reduction of the one hundred
right yet to be convinced
anyway.
Up.
I have is over that that
position is something that would
withstand any kind of screw the.
And and the
In the light of the light of the
fact that position was clearly
permitted.
For people aged twenty.
At the time of the constitution
and there was an expectation
there's a different delicious Mr
chairman hi.
Because I want something to pass
hi prepared
With possession.
If you don't deal with
possession.
You don't have to worry about
all the exceptions.
It's not to deal with the
various different exceptions
that would take place in terms
of in terms of whether you're in
the military whether law
enforcement whether you're
you're at your own house or
someone else's house to
supervising you.
But it does it does it does
restrict persons and so
Mr chairman I would.
At this time.
The.
Sure it is up to.
Seven three six point one.
Reconsideration of the.
There's a motion on the.
Reserves to close personal.
Mr chair this is a surprise
substitute for me and we
consider this on friendly.
Representative but we are now.
Sessions.
So Mr chair.
I think taking possession out
centrally makes the whole bill
meaningless it's five percent so
of our liquor laws have to be
twenty one would be like weir's
said if you're you're eighteen
or nineteen you can't high
alcohol you can still have it
and drink it.
That would render our our age
limit on purchasing alcohol the
meeting.
Hi we don't want people to buy
things because we don't want
them to assess.
R. for safety purposes I think
both of our liquor laws and and
with this law so I think it's a.
It's a it's a sum that.
The suburbs of Passover's
actually be meeting.
Mr.
Position sure.
Mr chairman I really object to
doing a surprise substitute on a
Sanchez who's not seen the
subject to.
No have the Senator gonna talk
to her you know perhaps we could
have compromised but I don't
think this is fair to do to a
sponsor of to just say here
here's the subject.
So I just don't think we should
even look at under those
circumstances.
Mr if I may senator.
You.
Okay.
There's two points on the board
of directors centers okay thank
you Mr thank you senator are you
so sure where you're trying to
do here but the fact to go back
as a non lawyer wanted to know
lawyers here
to the three I'm sorry through
the REC by the lord.
that's called mentoring so.
The interning yeah
Mr chair Senator sort of the I
see what you're trying to.
Separate the difference in
possession and purchasing and
we're going back to the store or
contacts you know I keep thank
you for all those of us who've
been the suburban Boston through
between Lexington Concord you
know I assume the the the rabble
who picked up their arms against
English when they came not only
disaster at some point that
approaches those guns that they
follow about far off the records
so I don't understand how you
think there's a difference
because historically at a by
those guns and they had a by law
carried off of musket balls and
power to fight off the British
sorry Marci and how you can
possibly separate that because
historically finally did it is
just about five minutes a post
units going out logic to make
server
recognized.
Director question is are the
sponsor of the the some of.
So.
Thank you Mr first of all I
don't want to make clear that
this is the second so like
prepare of of this bill first up
I prepared what about what the
purchase of any I are under the
age.
I I show that one to the sponsor
the sponsor indicated to me that
she didn't want to do any
firearm.
And I indicated the sponsor very
well in that case I will redo it
so that I think it's the
firearms that you have in this
bill.
And so in fact the the sponsor
night madam president did have a
conversation about this.
Conversations multiple
conversations about this.
and she has not seen this piece
of paper it this has the exact
parameters of what we last
discussed on the floor when I
talk to work which was.
Keeping the the round of the of
the firearms issues discussed
in terms of purchase but not
disposition so in that regard
this is not a surprise in anyway
to the sponsor
and
And so the the station.
Between purchase and possession
actually I think is rather
significant distinction and and
they do not go together.
They're not in places where we
restrict.
The purchase of something but
not the position something.
I will note
certainly and it's a little bit
of an once but there are also
lots of our courts have said
that we don't that that there is
no constructive possession if
young person is intoxicated you
can't trust a special.
and so you know they clearly
haven't amendment throwing up in
the smell of it everything else
so so in fact we we do
distinguish between the two
in that in that simple and we we
do distinguish in other areas in
terms of who can cause us
something and that is a
restricted tier and you can
purchased something restricted
ensure the I think I think when
you look at the.
At the historical content
context first of all under
federal law right now there is
federally it is unlawful for
anyone under the age twenty one
to purchase hang up.
That is existing federal all.
I think it was just.
That is also existing federal.
And it and so and so and so
there is that distinction in
fact is a recognized
distinction.
not I another is a lot but
specifically in terms of in
terms of farms.
So Mr chair Senator what about
the historical reference I hope.
Workers who were talking about
the historical context we will.
Yes certainly so the Mr chairman
and members of the minutes of
the historically up the when
when the.
When the malicious existed.
and and the militias were not as
we have the state militia today
they're often.
Private collections recognized
by the state.
And and that the people were
we're expected to participate in
and and we did not
They were expected to to possess
the guns.
they were not I was provided
with the guns that is true.
But in most cases the
the guns were owned by families
that were owned
they were they were provided
within a within a community so
that you didn't necessarily have
have the younger people because
again these major was twenty one
back then even though
participation and militia was
eighteen.
So that so that again if you had
a distinction there that I think
can be drawn from a broad
perspective.
In terms of the purchase first
the session.
Register.
It is.
Thanks Senator.
The resulting looking through
the wheels on the proposed
witnesses.
For that thank you Mr chair
thank you senator I think
there's issues within this that
are the exact same that are in
the original with the way
section a is written
So this kind of.
Quickly there's types of
Hold action weapons out there
that.
They come with a three round
magazine.
But since it's a detachable
magazine Mr chair and senator it
would be capable even though the
person doesn't purchase it at
the time of accepting a large
cap capacity feeding device so I
think there's still that same
issue that you're going to
encompass more firearms than
What what is intended.
Just a point that out I think
then it also.
The.
Under the same large capacity
feeding device that was
mentioned by Senator Baca
because of the way it's written
it's really any magazine
regardless of how many will hold
fits under the large capacity
feeding device definition
because it says means a magazine
or a receptacle for farm that
holds cartridges or shells
and that separates it with the
number so I I think there's the
same issues that were brought up
that are unintended this is also
faulty and it's
construction and so I'm gonna
have to oppose it as well even
though there is I respect the
effort
and I I do appreciate understand
or expanding of the position
portion of it that that is
important too many but it's just
still written in a way that is
very problematic thank you.
It was.
Use of.
So that part of the state that
that I I I understand that they
give the the.
Senator was just clean.
Representative twenty one.
at the request of a sponsor I we
did it.
Because she didn't she didn't
want to go outside of the the
Catskills is talking about
selected exactly the way that
was discussed.
Just with the positions there's
additional surgery will be.
The the the the same between the
two
Concludes everyone.
Most
of the.
I also appreciate the
decision to purchase the.
That's an important issue right
right.
This is still.
this is one is a large passing
the by the.
Versions.
Senator one reading that right
that definition of large yes
request.
Definition of a would.
one every semi automatic.
Most.
the version here is.
As a matter of encouraging
spring pressure.
Passing ten rounds of.
Chief if you factors care in
regards youth nine millimeter
semiautomatic this is sure that
would be correct and on time
with the capacity to make.
Max.
So as to.
Bill.
Mr chair does exclude law
enforcement.
Well the right answers your
question please.
Well during the.
Thank you Mr chair if I may he's
trying to use that weapon and
that's why law enforcement is
excluded in these exemptions.
Percent
most of.
Well the question.
So.
This is
the.
Certainly.
I just want to pass it really
that with these petitions.
We're local.
Senator Baca.
Hello.
Senator Ivey Soto yes that is
the only.
Senator Moores.
Senator Pirtle no Senator
Stewart now Senator Wirth no.
Senator Duhigg how Senator
Cervantes.
Resources to build.
Of the original bill.
Discussion.
Ready for both.
There.
All
right.
Level Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes and.
Senator Moores yes.
R. Pirtle yes Senator Stewart
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator both.
The
sales.
What the committee does this go
to next.
Mr chair this is the LESC
committee before it goes to the
floor.
Forces of.
The report.
Senator Baca yeah.
Senator Ivey Soto.
There were some note.
Senator Pirtle no.
Stuart.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Duhigg yeah.
service the.
That.
Senator Baca no.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
They're worth yes Senator Duhigg
yeah.
Your service.
Yeah.
Or or both.
Or.
Right Senator is also the
opportunities for action.
Thank you Mr chair thank the
committee a request I would.
Very the faster we.
In the field.
That that that would just all
all purchases if you stay out of
all the definition problem.
Revisions if you Mr chairman as
a procedural question I just I
how would you I just wanna
clarify we haven't had this yet
this year so.
We have a four four tie is that
the position of chair any member
can bring back a motion on that
how would you like to handle
that how do we deal with that
so.
Yes I was offered my money for
physicians.
Committees are to be scheduled
release time so.
To the sponsor committee members
about rescheduling but there
being no tabling majority of the
million vast majority of the
wreckage Authority I don't see
us making progress ability
Cruces New Mexico.
Which I wasn't suggesting that
leads the committee I think the
question just becomes how do we
get the bill back on the
schedule view you're gonna
require a motion to do that I
just having been in this
position as a chair it's one of
those things that that thank
you.
Challenge so I just want to it's
good to have a discussion of the
rest of the state there was a
motion that was a rejection rate
the motion there have been a six
seven state motion rather both
of to move it I think right now
the bill remains in the program
shares scheduling any other bill
committee.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair.
Senator.
on on the point we're discussing
you know so so just to be clear
it remains in committee and
subject to chair the chair put
it back on that's it okay I
think that's the best
interpretation rests okay
because because either.
I always exercised for our
scheduling those of us who.
Always remember the for actions
on the for the.
Right now this legislative okay
and I do appreciate that because
I have several senators my own
caucus or we need to build her
and so you know I hope those are
that goes into consideration as
well everybody's anxious the the
and I appreciate that.
I welcome this committee I hope
you'll come see me we.
We're at that place where all
the bills.
As many of them working late
hours all of the.
Local workforce last three days
with the results that we've been
through the trees on on some of
the problem all of you to work
in the estimate of eight point
we get to the triage when we
look at the bills and we try to
assess whether there needed
along or.
So the the it's got to be acted
upon expeditiously.
Also look for the general sense
of when we may be able to get a
bill for Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman so usually
when this happens we give
suggestions to the Sanchez so I
think the sponsor probably heard
what the issues are I see BC
amendments or as substitutes but
the the nature of the bill and
just to deal with these issues
for so I encourage you to go get
a substitute with some of these
amendments and bring it right
back to the chair that's how we
can handle most other Sanchez
who have this kind of the issue
so this is this is not dead to
me you saw us earlier fix
Senator would still use up
earlier fixed Senator Sedillo
Lopez is bill so do not give up
go up stairs get a substitute
that Mr Chairman respond.
I think that's it by not a
question but go ahead very quick
I appreciate that I do
appreciate I understand Mr
chairman thank you for the
suggestions thank you we
certainly looked at and
appreciate there are comments
about some of those amendments
regarding non game animals and
that's and some other things and
so we will do that and Mr chair
you will be seeing me in front
of your desk again.
We have other rules I
understand.
Thank you very much because Mr
chair committee.
We are
yes please a little.
A lot of people of course
are all out.
There will.
I like the fact.
Your by.
As a whole is the.
Your bill's.
Years.
I.
For.
The.
That is a yes Mr this Mister.
That's correct Mr chair.
I.
Experts.
Our.
That's correct Mr chair.
I.
Sure you are.
For.
The.
To to.
Your expertise with our.
The.
no more Mr chair.
We were the.
See that sure for our.
For the outside.
that would be outside Mr chair.
Senator what will do with your
reference.
Thank you for us to to.
For a small to all digital.
One question about that Mr chair
I was gonna do an opening and
then explain the substitute so
with that include all of that
that that ten minutes.
All for your.
All the because.
Ordinated advocacy Mr Ferrari
Allen.
recognizes those individuals
in the short term is now this.
For.
Of the Jews.
The.
Shares a sub provided to our
friends in law enforcement or
the estimate given on.
Would it was it was online was
in yes so they have to have
happened opportunities here.
Thank you Mr.
One eight one.
C.
the audience.
Really.
Those who have lost.
This
is.
I.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I'm here today because
New Mexicans deserve a police
force that's how do high
uniforms standard when it comes
to the use of force regardless
of HSD or geography that means
having a statewide having
statewide standards to live up
to our values of fairness equity
and justice under the law.
This is an issue of public
safety and I'm proud to carry
this legislation evidence shows
that officers who work at
departments of more rigorous use
of force policies are less
likely to be killed in the line
of duty and are also less likely
to harm retirement kill members
of the public.
All of that matters to me and I
know what matters to all of you.
The bill's provisions were
carefully developed with
feedback from civil rights
advocates law enforcement legal
experts.
And are all in line with the
stab wish best practice
practices in the field in
particular the substitute
version the bill reflects
feedback from law enforcement.
I'm confident that the standards
in this bill are rigorous and
realistic.
This bill requires that officers
exhaust all reasonable de
escalation tactics before
resorting to force that any
force be proportional and
necessary to protect human life.
We're also going to create a
duty to intervene something we
know law enforcement supports
and we're creating protections
for those officers that do the
right thing and intervene.
And by picking off and picking
up where chairman serve on his
and others left off last year we
want to improve on data
collection when it comes to
misuse of force and ensure
departments can vet new officers
of so that bad apples are
jumping from one department to
the next.
I like to make it clear to
everyone law enforcement is a
tough job thanks Larry and
standards helps keep everyone
safer.
As a retired military officer I
know how important it is to have
strong clear and consistent
rules of engagement and policies
on escalation of force there's
no reason why policing should be
any different.
Once again I'd like to introduce
my experts today to my left I
Leon Howard is the deputy
director of the American civil
liberties union of New Mexico
for a previously served as legal
director and Michael Avery who
was a guest here
earlier in judiciary who is
professor emeritus at Suffolk
university law school in the
immediate past president of the
board of directors of the
national police accountability
project.
With the few minutes that I have
remaining I want to talk a
little bit about the changes in
the substitute.
first off in section four do we
made updates to the section on
discharging a weapon at four in
to move the vehicle the language
in this bill as introduce was
overly restrictive entering
unrealistic and the new language
closely mirrors the requirements
of standing operating procedures
of the Albuquerque police
department and several other
departments across the state.
We also made updates in less
lethal weapons in section four
J.
we had a total ban on chemical
munitions kinetic impact
projectiles and police dog bites
but based on feedback the
subject to version a longer
contains absolute bans but
allows these tactics in certain
circumstances the provisions
related to electronic control
weapons inspection for age are
also updated in the substitute.
When we look at section five F.
totality of circumstances mental
or medical health professional
we recognize that the fit Bela
ability of medical and mental
health professionals very
significantly based on location
and the substitute version
clarifies that the totality of
circumstances stances review
will take into consideration the
availability of such providers.
When we look at section five K.
totality of circumstances in
training based on feedback once
again the subs to version add
stuff to factors considered in a
totality of circumstances and
consideration on whether the
officer acted in accordance with
their training and the agency's
policies.
When we look at section six AA
discipline for unlawful use of
force the substitute version
raises the bar for mandatory
decommissioning a severe
sanction such that is reserve
for reckless or willful
violations of the law the
substitute further removes
violations of provisions related
to Leslie to force as grounds
for mandatory decommissioning.
When we look at section thirteen
A. thirteen E. as well
we also made updates on knock
and announce based on feedback
from law enforcement others the
requirements are officers
knock and announce before
forcibly entering a residence to
execute a search warrant now
provides for exigent
circumstances in paragraph
thirteen E. in the bill as
introduced which banned certain
specialized economic trick
weaponry from the execution of
search warrants this is been
struck in the substitute on the
recommendation of sheriff John
Allan the minimum time for
officers to wait before forced
entry has been changed also for
up to thirty seconds instead of
sixty seconds.
And finally we made an update to
non retaliation for intervening
the substitute includes a new
section section fourteen that
amends the whistleblower
protection act standards
protection officers to intervene
in a report on lawful uses of
force pursuant to section seven
of this bill.
With that
madam chair
I'd like if I have a little bit
or many time I like to get my
experts system.
Time to comment that's okay.
Good.
That.
I review annually about two
hundred fifty cases of law
enforcement agency alleged
misconduct across the country
and I've done that for forty
years so I've literally looked
at thousands of cases of
excessive force over the last
forty years it's my opinion that
this bill is a necessary
addition to what we currently
have in that it tells officers
in many instances exactly what
they can do and exactly what
they can to in particular the
portions of the bill the deal
with the escalation and with
intervention by officers when
they see other officers doing
something wrong are crucial
additions to any use of force
policy and I urge this committee
to give this bill it's
consideration.
Madam chair Senators
to honor to be here presenting
before you today but I have to
also say it's an honor to
present in front of the first
person who hired me at the first
you did so district attorney's
office Spence Patek it's a
pleasant surprise to see you she
makes me more nervous than any
of you.
and then today I'm here to offer
my perspective specifically
since I left that the district
attorney's office thirteen years
ago litigating of police
misconduct and excessive use of
force cases in New Mexico
professor Avery can give a more
national landscape plans and I
want to zero in on kind health
cases are playing out here in
New Mexico and answer those
questions particularly as they
pertain to New Mexico
constitutional law which parts
from our federal counterparts in
many instances.
What are madam chair were
prepare for public comment a
question from the committee.
Right thank you
the.
For for proponents we have
mark mark Allen Chris Phillips
and cake for lack of we'll do
two minutes each are they are
any of you here.
Percent.
You are come on come on us.
Okay are you to where you
opponents opponents that is here
the mark Allen I it is that we
are going to give the county
perspective times share for on.
Okay we get to.
Come on this for like so in that
case that there's going to be I
think that one person speaking
in favor once the person
speaking against what you have
about five minutes each if you
owe money coming up and speaking
my phone was on the webcast can
hear.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Kate for
like I am a practicing lawyer
and a member of the New Mexico
trial lawyers association in
just briefly I want to say that
you know I support this bill
because it does create standards
that law enforcement officers
all over New Mexico can be
trained on it creates standards
that will be consistent
statewide this is a real urgent
problem in New Mexico I mean we
have one of the highest rates of
officer involved shootings in
the country I think this bill
promotes officer safety but also
public safety and I support it
thank you.
Madam chair Ferrari is going to.
I think.
Opposition and you have up to
five minutes as well.
I'm sorry madam chair what was
that time up to five minutes
five minutes thank you madam
chair of members of the.
Commission I I want to speak to
you today on on house bill are
to be Senate bill two fifty two
money machine for are you from
San Juan County also serve as
president of New Mexico
sheriff's and I haven't seen
many of our New Mexico sheriffs
around here and we haven't been
at the table that that's not our
intent we we definitely want to
be here and be part of progress
here in New Mexico this is
specifically to this bill
Please reform should not be a a
negative term or something that
law enforcement doesn't accept
we do accept that and we
absolutely want to be involved
in making law enforcement better
in the state of Mexico but we do
have some serious concerns we
believe our officer safety
concerns in reference to this
bill in the one that's the most
glaring is the standard of the
necessary step in the standard
of of necessary this is a
standard that used by the United
Nations is not used in the
United States north as a follow
what is what is supported by our
Supreme Court of objective
reasonableness now with this
type of standard unnecessary of
unnecessary the necessary
standard what it does is it is
actually take us back several
years to what we call a use of
force continue what that man is
a W. R. an officer at the start
out no matter what the threat
was they had to start at the
very least amount and be able to
justify every increase that they
were doing from that not if they
were presented with a firearm
they would have to file for the
start off the lowest level force
and work their way up until they
were able to meet that same
force with equal force in
today's environment that makes
it very risky for law
enforcement particularly when we
talk about active shooter in a
situation like this and under
this bill there are Levin
different steps that an officer
will have to go go through some
of a multi faceted before they
can get to that point if you can
take a new issue of an active
shooter if there's an active
shooting going on right now
according to this bill we will
have to get negotiators
everybody else together before
we can go on an act this is not
allow us to do what we do right
now as far as training as direct
threat if we get one officer
there we want him to go in and
stop the action of the
individual part of this bill if
we do not follow the procedures
of this bill then that officer
not only will lose his license
but there is a possibility that
officer will also face criminal
charges for going to saving
children because they hear shots
fired and he is not starting out
at the lowest level of these
eleven steps they have to take
for that we believe this this
bill is a a real hazard to law
enforcement I also you will
stand before you.
Let you know that the state New
Mexico is in dire need of law
enforcement.
If we were to change to this
type of of for standard we are
going to have a deficit of law
enforcement in New Mexico not
only for the high standards are
hell hell to to to worry about
having to do their job not
following protocol losing their
license possibly get charged for
it this is going to turn
laterals from coming into our to
meet our our our state in a
force our current law
enforcement to seek employment
elsewhere that's a serious
concern so just projects
director that this is my mistake
secretary but we also have
wanted to actually alter my
timing separated at the time you
know from we all but so if you
if you could yes I'll wrap it up
in in we're absolutely willing
to work with the the the bill
writers in this and and senator
pope to give any other insight
that we may have we do have some
other issues we'd like to
address with us would be more
happy to work with you Sir thank
you madam chair thank you.
But.
And and I apologize that is not
my mistake.
I appreciated then the madam
chair members of the committee
and I believe the rest of law
enforcement probably believe
that they could speak on the
public comments as well but I'm
certainly would allow you to
make that decision madam chair I
I think the the last time we
spoke about this in less than we
have meeting I was really
encouraged by the common
interests that we had and I
think we were looking for
legitimacy within long force
when we talked about the trust
in law enforcement we talked
about a statewide standard use
of force policy we're all
certainly we're very encouraged
by that and to be able to come
to the table have the discussion
of this bill it is a bridge too
far this bill had troubles in
our opinion two years ago it has
troubles the today and those
revised from a couple years ago
when we don't feel let's uh it
is much better than it was then
You know one of the things that
that we're this is very
important to us office as well
as Richard what we try to fix
here in New Mexico and we can
hear you know anecdotally that
there might be issues and and
and that you know he had cases
specifically when he's at the
prosecutor's office but you know
have we looked at how many law
enforcement officers do we have
for New Mexico how many calls
for service do we take in the
state of New Mexico how many of
those result in use of force and
then how many of those resort
and into an excessive use of
force and I think we're all
interested in any for any any
single one of those cases that
do result in excessive use of
force that we minimize those if
not eliminate them and I think
we're taken tremendous strides
towards that goal I think we've
talked about that the last time
around what I'm really concerned
about here is the standards and
the base of the retooling of law
enforcement we have a decades if
not more than a hundred years of
of
K. law by the United States
Supreme Court of what
governments law enforcement and
we obviously
as route they're working use
that case law as as a guide in
the pool and and and train our
police officers make sure
they're effective when they're
out there working this
completely re tools that and
exclusively can get behind it we
tried several times to
coordinate with the sponsor we
we got a meeting last Friday
with the drafters of this bill
which we saw this we can be able
to provide input and we have a
lot of clout along person this
year they have not been able to
provide input on this bill I'll
call wrap up madam chair members
of the committee and that the as
I said last time I think the
trust and legitimacy that we
want to law enforcement law
enforcement leadership once it
just the same if not more we
become extremely frustrated when
we see a basis that brings law
enforcement to a negative light
and we want to always
continuously raise the platform
first mobile professionals of
law enforcement but this bill we
had no input on very little
discussion is very problematic I
just sat here and read like
pages and pages and pages of it
operationally I think we would
have a very difficult time
abiding by this law thank you
madam chair.
Then there are some
organizations who.
He acknowledged as in support
they are Albuquerque health care
for the homeless American civil
liberties union of New Mexico
how much because New Mexico
disability rights New Mexico the
quality New Mexico makes a
Presbyterian church in
Albuquerque the league of women
voters of central New Mexico the
sort affects the ministry of New
Mexico New Mexico conference of
churches Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association and a
line then we will go to
questions from the committee.
Hey this stuff Senator Stewart.
Here.
Is.
Those.
No.
Very well.
We.
The local.
General.
Okay Sir.
Thank you the people from.
What will healthy is.
Where is that where you have.
All.
Valuation.
Us.
There's.
That we're going to have all.
We.
That was that that the share.
There.
And I know we also have chief
two thousand and should I be
here as well I don't know if.
They want to speak.
That.
I.
Madam I see chief Johnson and so
I think I would like to hear
him.
In.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you for your
time of
very much respect Center pulled
and I do respect the misspelled
as allowed us a few
opportunities to talk since the
session started
we set before you a couple of
weeks ago and discussed of these
topics my mic my stance on that
has not changed there are
portions of this bill I'll tell
you what I do like ma'am if we
need to find a section I'll do
that for you as well I
appreciate that the escalation
part of presheaf did you
intervene part of slightly
tweaked the database for but the
use of force part of the the
making it easier to prosecute
police officer part of those no
beyond the three that I
mentioned I still think this
bill needs work
I said before I wish we had a
magic wand that we can change
the trajectory of the state we
didn't have anymore uses of
force however I don't know that
that's going to be a reality in
our lifetimes over this.
The little somebody who spoke to
you for this mentioned it's a
huge problem in the state are
you all serve all shootings use
of force I would agree with that
and as I mentioned during the
hearing a couple weeks ago we
also have a huge problem with
violent crimes were either
number one or number two every
single year I also mention that
since two thousand seventeen for
my officers we had a five
hundred eighty percent increase
in officer assault and batteries
that is where I suspect is a
salty for battery my officers so
that is an acceptable as well.
I told you all the things that
we've done since George Ford
happens in in the spring or
early summer of twenty twenty of
the some of the things you asked
to do some of the things that
you we didn't ask us to do we
plan our old apartment certified
in C. I. T. by the end of next
year we're part of the able
program which is only one of
three agencies in the state
that's part of that which is I
believe this gentleman
highlighted during his testimony
last time
we're also putting a ton of
money into various ways to train
our officers to ensure that
honor to interactions with those
we serve get better but those
things take money those things
take time and I can assure you
that we are working on the.
I will close with of the piece
of the bill that I didn't like I
believe senators want to sum it
up best this afternoon on the
Senate floor where he said he's
not interested in passing bills
that are unconstitutional some
of the pieces in here although
I'm not a lawyer I believe our
we try to change the standards
for use of force that we have
from the supreme court for a
very long time in this bill in
my opinion attempts to do that
so with that thank you for your
time Sir I appreciate you let me
speak center or.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Well special.
Madam will speak on the way I
have
it please note that the
secretary please behalf.
Madam chair and I said is thirty
pages here and just really go
into labor and talk about quite
a bit of it but the ones that
will talk about chokeholds and
mentions you can't touch any
part of the person's head or or
neck I'm here to tell you the
one who wrote this is never been
an altercation or fight one of
the first things that happens is
when someone tries to take a
police officer down in tackles
one to the ground need to
control that person from trying
to get the feet of money and one
of the first things that we
teach this to press down the
back of the head to make sure
they can arts there back to take
you down if they are successful
in that piece and they start
making you have that that motion
by course keep you from about to
head off the pavement you're
told to hold on to their head so
that you don't bounce off the
ground there there are
legitimate reasons for touching
a person's head or neck and in a
fight it's almost impossible not
to do so we pointed this out
during our meeting on Friday
that this was something that we
were concerned about it got no
traction I'll talk to you about
another section here or talk
about shooting at or from the
moving motor vehicle as an
example mentions that the
vehicle itself cannot be a
weapon
Page ten.
And some of them going off
memory madam chair members of
the committee and so I don't
have every part of of the bill
fared in that sense but it's
it's all about the vehicle
itself cannot be a weapon and so
does this tell me now that a
person has to be practically
shooting out of the vehicle
before I see that as a deadly
threat for law enforcement and
so if you have the person that
wants to drive through a parade
like we had in Gallup and they
maybe their motivation is to
drive over in some people I can
no longer stop that threat but
also mentions that I have to
recently exhaust and dust the
escalate with that motorists if
the windows are up and they're
still a deadly threat with a
motor vehicle I can't do those
things
so that's that's it that's
another example the bill does
not divide defined with violent
crime is still on page ten it
doesn't define what that is and
so it says you cannot deploy a
police canine in the system
affecting the rest of a person
suspected only of a non violent
crime the bill the bill doesn't
provide what a violent crime is
You can no longer deploy a
electronic control expert
electronic device basically the
the call stun gun here
electronic control weapon which
I take some exception to the
word economic instead of calling
a device
on a person for non violent
crime so if I now have the duty
to apprehend and I have two of
them in a foot chase for a
nonviolent crime maybe it's a
burglar it's nonviolent still
have the the do the no
obligation the citizen I think
would expect that I do my job to
apprehend the person I can no
longer use a taser for that
situation so I'm you're you're
removing tools from the police
officer and now we're going from
hands on to something higher
level force and then a taser to
potentially now that situation
escalating and we talked about
this a committee last time
whenever you use an under
reaction or under utilized force
that typically will escalate the
situation so we're I could of
control this person early on
that leaves me in a position
where I have to
they have to use a higher level
of force than initially intended
I take exception to this bill
referred to people as victims of
force
Throughout this document of
course if I could find for you.
Thank you.
the talks about in this section
basically that the the
perception is that the offender
is now the victim and it
mentions throughout this entire
document document and it sets
the tone that is now a victim of
Force well before reading the
determined if the use of
workforce was proper by officer
not.
and and I would that would tell
you that in that sense a a
victim is a person who suffers
at the hands of another person's
action where as a suspect over
subjects who are committing
these actions that would lead to
an offer to have to use force
are exactly that their suspect
and offenders still on page
twelve ma'am.
There and.
It's just renters.
Thanks.
The only thing is is.
A lawyer.
That for.
The that's what we have.
That is correct and as I
mentioned on by was not to
provide the use of K. nine help
me I will pay sits on.
First session for Page ten talks
about the use of of canines not
be able to use for nonviolent
and we use obviously the canines
are building clearing those type
of things people who commit
perjury the inside of the
building we're left having a
clear those buildings were
sending law enforcement officers
in there obviously if we don't
have don't have the availability
of a canine to be able to can
conduct that search a K. nine I
get on understand that you know
okay canine biting a person
seems harsh the alternative is
an officer to be confronted face
to face with an offender inside
of a building on the left having
to make a decision in in a split
second to be able to to handle
those things so.
Use of of canine is very common
within law enforcement for
building clearing its use for
bomb detection and a series of
other things of this bill would
restrict that.
The recording procedures on page
seventeen for issuing warnings
prior to discharging a firearm
this is a very realistic
expectation to ask law
enforcement to that to to
provide verbal warnings before
address addressing a deadly
threat.
Page eighteen but I would argue
that pay proportional use of
force or the least amount of
force necessary is not
necessarily exactly the same as
a reasonable amount of force an
officer may use a resume on a
force and obviously that may not
always be the eggs you know the
in in the event of twenty twenty
hindsight having attorney or
anyone else scrutinizing and
judging officer the who has
moments the side what they need
to do to be able to go back and
and then with twenty twenty
hindsight the term that will
that was quite the the the
lowest level of force you could
potentially have done this
instead and the the the the test
is reasonableness and not
whether it's the exact lowest
level of force.
Going back to page two it talks
about in the definitions
includes chokeholds as a death
or great bodily harm why just
include just chokeholds alone I
understand that we want to put
some emphasis on this but
there's a lot of things that
could amount to use of deadly
force the writing instrument as
being user for me is is being
used as a writing is for at the
moment if I take it and try to
stab someone in the neck with
repeatedly becomes deadly force
we pointed this out
Concern for us is if you
identify chokeholds has a has
duly endorsed then you really
kind of opening it up instead of
having a definition that is all
encompassing your now hoping up
to excluding thanks for having
this.
This
is really Army and and.
Yes ma'am so now I have a lot of
the kids are more.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am Madam chair of the
wrap up there there are many
more I don't have time this in
this committee that are concerns
us and like I said you know we
have ten months sometimes to
work on these things are well in
advance and law enforcement
wants the same things we we we
got it right bills and then the
laws in the place that are
achievable this is not is going
to very difficult for us madam
chair and the the seven for ten
thank you.
So for.
Right now all madam chair I'm
sorry I wonder if I could have
one of my expert respond to some
of that if that's possible.
Senator Sanchez distributed.
The number of points were made
and I think we should start by
being clear about the fact that
this bill goes beyond what the
courts have decided is
unconstitutional and addresses
several matters as a question of
policy as the Albuquerque police
department is done the
Albuquerque police department
has specifically stated that its
use of force policy goes beyond
what the Supreme Court is
defined as excessive force under
the constitution so we're not
limited and this New Mexico is
not limited in the legislature's
not limited
to prohibiting only
constitutional violations it's
also well within its right to
say that as a matter of policy
the plea should do and shouldn't
do certain things secondly the
term reasonable force comes from
the constitutional definition
that the Supreme Court has
supplied this bill specifically
moves away from reasonableness
as the appropriate definition of
force that's not excessive and
substitutes instead necessary
and proportional there's a
reason for that and the reason
is that if you look at the case
is decided across the country by
the federal courts using
reasonableness as the definition
you see a very wide variety of
concepts about what constitutes
reasonable force.
Some circuits for example
allow officers to use force if
they only suspect that the
person they're confronting may
have a weapon others require the
officers that actually see a
weapon before they can use
deadly force their mother and
their and dozens of examples
that could be given about the
elasticity of reasonableness as
a standard.
This bill says it would be much
better to be more specific and
require forced to be necessary
and forced to be performed
proportional before they use it.
With regard to the statement by
the sheriff that it requires
officers to go through eleven
steps which is Senator Stewart
you asked about.
There's no such provision in the
bill what the bill says is that
officers have to exhaust
available.
Available.
And lesser serious alternatives
to force before they can use
serious force or deadly force.
Officers are going to be able to
argue in many instances and
argue persuasively and I would
agree with them that in many
situations certain levels of
force that were previously on
the use of force continuum that
the sheriff referred to are
simply not available in a
certain situation but if there
are other alternatives that are
available they should be
employed before for example
deadly force is resorted to.
The courts interpreting the
constitution have said as the
secretary did.
That you don't have to use the
least serious amount of force in
order for the force to be
constitutional but as a matter
of policy it makes a lot of
sense to require officers to use
lesser
the lead less force than for
example deadly force and that's
what that's what this bill says.
the tech the secretary asked.
Excuse me one moment
Chief Johnson
who I am I am glad to hear that
he agrees with us about the
escalation intervention and the
database
but he Arab use that one reason
we have so many
shootings of civilians in.
I'm I'm gonna catch up just
because the the hour is late and
we we don't have a quorum now
regardless but I think Senator
technically you you still have
the floor.
Are we going to.
Okay I was this is the that.
Thank you research has been done
on the relationship between
assaults on officers and the
general level of a crime in the
jurisdiction and the amount of
excessive force by police so for
example states like Tennessee
Michigan Massachusetts New York
and the district of Columbia
have relatively high rates of
violent crime but they do not
have high rates of killings by
police states like Oklahoma
Montana Colorado West Virginia
and Mississippi have high rates
of killings slide please without
similar high rates of violent
crime by civilians so is the
reserves simply does not bear at
that point by the sheriff there
are many things that can be
explained and I hope this
committee will reconvene at some
point so that we have more time
to discuss the.
The knowledge.
And and and Mr chair and feel
free to correct me if I'm wrong
but Madison was we were just
going to start the conversation
tonight and and then reconvene
on on this bill as our our next
meeting yeah Senator I've
checked we've lost the our
quorum in the centers were
missing I'm persuaded or not
coming back this season so it
will be impossible for them to
take action on the bill
that's right you know I
appreciate your last comment we
could spend weeks months on this
topic I think we and then just a
justifiably and deservedly photo
so we have hundreds of bills on
this committee and we won't have
that opportunity our job will be
to do what we can with the.
Resources that we do have my I'd
like to thank the law
enforcement we're here all day
long.
I want to make sure that we for
your presentation your
presentation Senator folks might
because you all have been
waiting for quite a bit of time
my my general observations are
Google one is that I think the
committee did a service to all
of you you Senator but the law
enforcement and everyone here by
having a hearing early in the
session when we had a little bit
more time and is really trying
here with more about best
practices what I heard at the
time was.
So that we can be proud of I
think which is that we certainly
at the state police level.
So we're going a lot of things
that we very proud of and and
even our legislative.
Working with our.
Every part of the state.
Right operation of the.
Hello.
The.
For the last several years I've
tried to bring in.
For all the federal.
Orders.
Our of course ít.
But it's very frustrating to
talk.
Those years a recommendation for
orders okay Jodie's.
For the for factors so we
really.
All.
Four years of
Well as I look at your budget
those were the.
Right now I appreciate using
services at Rio track the more
specific.
For.
I still want to go full regular
that you introduce maybe that's
possible to
do it for is to law enforcement
officers more specifically the.
Either sure.
Those bills a lot of later I.
Right the use of this and is
provided with other guys.
The civics lesson this is.
It also recognize a lot of this
comes on the tree.
The two.
The the because of all.
This session for his.
The lawyer.
For a.
The offices.
Are you really with offices.
You got it now for so long
Let us see the radio.
There's always it is very those
officers well and.
There was a vision for a.
The these are C. U. offering.
Is.
Judge of the.
This is the judge of our
law enforcement officers that
means.
Secretary
zero three.
It is to appropriations.
Hi Jess the.
We
want to do this.
The.
Mr chair.
The support is here that there I
I understand that after our
presentation on that there would
be a lot of coordination between
law enforcement the folks
working on this bill
And.
So I'm it's unclear to me how
much coordination there actually
was I there.
There hasn't been significant
coordination until this point
the.
That was kind of one of the
points on that.
Get everyone in the same room
together.
Reporter record the meeting of
the latest of the right
medications regulars or really.
Representative services.
The release of the what about
what you're going to go along
with your loans to this is the.
Our goals for the chance to.
Yeah.
As a resource.
Your ability.
So.
The rise of of your.
What we.
Alleged.
So
sorry for.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
honorable members I'm joined by
Rachel Feldman from Santa Fe sos
indivisible I'll turn it over to
her and a couple other
commentators will try to keep it
within five minutes but as you
know on Senate bill three
seventy five past I believe in
the not two thousand twenty one
I was vetoed by the honorable
governor I had some really good
stuff contained in there she was
concerned about some of the make
up of the public bodies that was
a remedy and the wisdom of this
committee put eighty percent of
that language into house bill
sixty eight the big crime
package from the thirty day
session of last year as you know
the the components with regards
to law enforcement academy the
creation of the lawn the law
enforcement certification board
and the creation of the the
curriculum council essentially
those laws do not kick in until
July first of twenty twenty
three so we're actually
proposing a.
Immense to law that has not gone
into effect yet this bill is
necessary to close the gaps with
regards to responsibilities
duties rulemaking and the
transition of the law
enforcement academy and into the
new law enforcement academy
aboard and the law enforcement
certification board ms Fuhrman
worked tremendously in person
meetings zooms conversations
today to develop the.
the bill at a point five version
this is the point six
essentially Senate Judiciary
Committee sub two percent of the
nineteen what I ask is that the
call of.
Three or four police officers
not necessarily to.
What the public talk about their
involvement and and their their
impressions of the filmmaking
process and and the bill itself
maybe one minute each share it
with them and those are you
present thank you sheriff the
sheriff and also Santa Fe County
share.
Mr chair of the committee thank
you for having me let's just say
a few words about this bill as
as a chair representative of the
county as a law enforcement
professional and leader and also
a member of the law enforcement
academy board it's important I
think this bill addresses some
of the gaps as a senator stated
in reference to consistency in
training of funding for training
on throughout law enforcement
through the state of New Mexico
the lack of reporting and
tracking of law enforcement
training and certification for
law enforcement officers
throughout the state of New
Mexico and to create
analysis of what we're treating
our officers every five years
and come up with a job task
force analysis to make sure that
the training is relevant and
that it's up to date come so we
can offer our law enforcement
officers the best training in
the state the law enforcement
academy sets the standard for
what our officers are trained in
and how they interact with the
public once the Lee the law
enforcement academy
that this is going to again
bridge some gaps when it comes
to the training one of the
things that this is going to do
is modernize training and and
provide professional development
for law enforcement careers and
what that will do is it will
professionalizing law
enforcement it'll it'll give of
our officers updated training
and relevant training and
actually provide an Avenue for a
career path for law enforcement
what that's going to do is
enhance officers as police
officers for state has
parameters as supervisors and
future leaders of for the state
of New Mexico thank.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll call
up a Georgene the must this this
bill deals with tele
communicators they were not in
the house bill sixty eight bill
but we want to strengthen the
the language with regards to
that so George Georgene the boss
is the director McKinley County
metro dispatch and M. nine one
one affiliate vice chair.
I thank you good evening
chairman members of the
committee this bill will allow
experience public safety tele
communicators a seat at the
table to collaborate in
policymaking Development
oversight regarding training
standards and discipline for
tele communicators that are
certified through the academy at
the department of public safety
we bring valuable information to
develop policy training and
coping initiatives for new
technology such as next Gen nine
one one that will feed live
video and tax of incidents that
are in progress and new
technology surrounding emergency
medical dispatch nine eight
eight an NCIC all of these
operations contribute to
ensuring officer safety.
other respond or safety and will
further strengthen the quality
of team work between officers
and tele communicators.
We get asked that chief Johnson
to come up is he still in the
room to have a minute or.
what we go with the the director
of the law enforcement academy
Mr Bridgman Baker.
Mr chair members the committee
thinks your time serving in this
capacity for over the last year
at the opportunity to testify in
front of Courts corrects and
Justice twice from relative to
this bill and I want to
highlight and find my comments
to the importance of continuity
during this transition process
it's my belief that the work
that has been put in by members
of the community the law
enforcement training community
and all the collaborators in
this process over the last nine
months that will ensure the
smooth transition from the
already enacted law as Senator
representative will be going to
affect your life first we have
over a hundred allegations of
misconduct that are already open
with our discipline system it's
really important that we get not
only transparency and
accountability for the folks
that are already being
investigator charge under the
current law but also integrates
smoothly the two new boards and
council in order to promulgate
rules that will be reflective of
what the standards and the
expectations of our community is
we hope that we are able to
address those issues within the
language are constructed in in
the formulation this bill it was
done in a collaborative process
but I have not seen during my my
tenure law enforcement the plot
part of the efforts and we're
hopeful that this will address
in the many stops and starts
that could interrupt either due
process rights of people accused
of misconduct more importantly
bring about the accountability
that this group is seeking can
we share in that additionally
the the incentive visitation of
the data compliance and
collection will empower this
legislature and our constituency
to be able to hold accountable
the places where our aims are
working and where we can use
improvement so grateful for the
opportunity able to participate
here happy to provide further
commentary and and and
information related to the
compliance and training portions
of this and thank you for your
time thank you and I'll turn
over to my experts chair.
And for a moment to and Rachel
Feldman from invisible just west
Santa Fe the bill's author and
compiler of all the best ideas
from the summer and fall and
session.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and senators this
project started as a concern
about violence and we look very
closely at the issues of
violence in New Mexico and found
the amount of violence that was
directed at all that police
officers to be an issue they are
often it's victims and then we
further found that there's an
enormous amount of secondary
violence that results from
poorly managed or or on managed
interactions where law
enforcement is is involved so
observers.
And people involved around the
edges the officers themselves
now with visit visual access the
public safety tele communicators
and when the stuff hits the news
all of us are hit by this this
eight W. eight PTSD mental
health suffering suicides and so
we we looked at the existing
structure of law enforcement to
see how we could best address it
and we found that the incidents
in which police officers and put
public safety tele communicators
have to team up and collaborate
is that the nexus of where you
could mitigate violence we can't
address through this how the
causes of violence that many and
there's many other ways to deal
with it but to decrease the
intensity frequency consequences
and secuela violence we believe
that creating a strong a
complete comprehensive system
that addresses both training and
licensing and holding the system
accountable that specifies what
the citizens expectations are
for the police as well as what
the police believe they are
obligated to provide in those
standards are in the bill and
they were very negotiated with
between citizens and police for
a long time and with a lot of
changes in input the the data
requirements will enable the
system to report and analyze and
evaluate performance of the
system so we're looking at a
system that sets standards has
accountability has a policy
function in each of the
oversight bodies and that
provides for an institution they
can learn and improve itself on
an ongoing basis that requires
specific.
Take our it spelling out the
responsibilities of the two
oversight policy making bodies
it requires
Funding and staffing adequate
staffing with the proper
qualifications and those are the
things we fast forward
appropriations and it requires
data collection incentives to
require data collection and a
basis for evaluating the system
going forward so.
So in closing Senate bill
nineteen will establish the
system to hold law enforcement
to highest standards as a
profession.
create the potential for the
institutions to learn and
improve without any statutory
fixes and moved to Mexico's
great law enforcement profession
community into the future thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr such as just quick
I appreciate very much
misspelled in the work you have
done on this and you really move
the needle to get this to this
point I just again I and I'm
glad Mr chair and I was willing
to sit and stay because I think
it's super important that we
also heard this bill in the
context of both of these bills
and I just I'll reiterate what
what Senator doing said I felt
like after the presentation we
did there was a foundation here.
To really get there and to do
something and I still think that
that's the case I still think
that's the case and even though
you know we are obviously time
is of the essence I'm just
hoping that between you know
these two bills and with the
input of of certainly the
secretary and and law
enforcement this year and it's
worked on both these bills we
can get to that spot where there
are those issues that.
You know may not be everything
and I mean clearly there's a ton
of things here but we need to go
pick the ones that we can get
done and what I want is I want
to get a bill is gonna get
signed I mean let's let's let's
let's not let's not let's let's
talk about what's going on I
mean the reality is you we do a
ton of work and we send
something up and you know the
secretary is was super
constructs here the chief of
police was constructs when we
all met together and then mean
everyone's completely on the
same page I know some of the
sheriff you work here at that at
the meeting that the the meeting
you did the committee.
But let's not let's not forget
that we've got to get something
to get signed in and I just
think there's a chance here to
do something really good I'm
committed to putting in the time
to make it happen and I
appreciate Mr chair you you
laying that out so I just wanted
to say that and and kind of put
that in the in the process thank
you Mr chair.
Nobody here saying this.
They gave us we also numbers I.
Lots of experience.
Two years ago issues will order.
All right.
To
the.
The work is.
It is very very presentation
here.
Those are such a small state.
Of those here are of very.
Through it because we're smaller
little more.
But.
Two
or.
Zero
zero.
Every.
The operators.
dollars a line.
To.
Earlier this week.
The.
Should be capabilities of the
State.
Session.
Of the.
They're very cautious about.
There was a massive.
I say that those.
We're a safety issue.
The.
Situation or.
Our of their.
On the.
Sanchez.
To go over.
I want to.
Your I see.
Of the.
So to.
Your
mask.
Your.
Hello.
The.
We wind up I do have a
procedural thing off the topic
that we just discuss on the
record and the million.
The state.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you for coming
we get to make a motion.
The national purposes I think we
we don't have a quorum I don't
know if you want me to make that
or we can wait as though.
I make a.
Make a do not pass motion on
Senate bill I will need to pass
over this gosh US edition.
Level three all that will do is
put this up so we can post it
Senator Williams is building.
I.
Read the title.
I did read the title and on the
floor.
