annual report.
We also have something new this
year which we call fact sheets
we put put together some bullet
points on fact sheets in several
areas pre trial detention the
jury service and COVID nineteen
evictions foreclosures and
consumer debt COVID nineteen
facts and pre trial justice
these are pre these factions
contain additional information
you think might be interested in
which I will not have time to
present to you today.
You know normal times I'd be
given the state of the judiciary
address to a joint session of
the house and Senate but COVID
stop that from happening this
year nevertheless it remains
important that you just members
of the Senate Judiciary
Committee know what the
achievements and the challenges
of the judiciary are thank you
for the opportunity to present
those to you in summary form
today.
In March last year court
operations dramatically changed
and essentially overnight when
the pandemic hit and I'm gonna
say it's a deadly pandemic.
Within twenty four hours of the
governor's declaration of a
public health emergency the
Supreme Court act the number one
priority was to keep the course
open for business well keep with
our employees judges members of
the public attorneys and
litigants safe the court issued
what are now dozens of
administrative orders mandating
courts to require health
screening questions and
temperature checks for everyone
entering our courthouses to make
detailed plans for resuming jury
trials and it person proceedings
to provide for contact tracing
frequently cleaning all surfaces
and equipment thank you Hanson
sanitizer readily available and
of course to worry choir
everyone to wear masks and
maintain physical distancing at
all times some of the highlights
you know the court created what
we call the emergency response
team or he R. T. the point ER T.
approved or reduced operation
plans for all thirteen judicial
districts for metropolitan court
for eighty one units will point
and thirty three probate courts
all of these plans to address
our doctors for managed and
scheduled and how and we're
hearing surgery trials would
resume.
In the first year of fiscal year
twenty twenty the judiciary
spread over two and a half
million dollars for COVID
response efforts for masks sure
supplies for monitor sanitizers
plexiglas barriers computers and
cameras your to devoted more
more than sixty nine thousand
hours of person hours to keep
records safe and open for
business E. R. T. provided
cameras in training on video
platforms such as Google lead
and soon the judges and court
staff we created a voluntary
mask brigade to thank three
thousand nine hundred twenty
eight mass for juror judicial
officers and employees we
provided video links to do need
detention centers and jail from
court rooms to jails for
arrangements and other hearings
and at the same time give the
public access to observe the
proceedings electronically we
also shifted to electronic
electronic filings as much as
possible.
I'm also very proud to report to
you that the judiciary submitted
for reimbursement for costs
under the cares Act we knew that
these reimbursements would go to
the general fund and not back to
the judiciary but yet we still
wanted to do our part in getting
these reforms in the monies back
to the state as a result of our
efforts the Jud Judiciary cost
seventy three thousand dollars
to be reimbursed to the general
fund.
I know there's a lot of talk
about jury trial so I'd like to
address those briefly if I might
we had two pauses in jury trials
for first of all for March
twelfth until July twentieth
July twenty twenty depending on
whether where and when the court
planned for each quarter was
approved secondly we pause jury
trial from December fourteenth
through February first twenty
twenty due to the potential
second wave of the factions.
We have several safety
precautions in place for jury
trials first of all the summons
to all jurors has a lake for the
prospective jurors to access a
video which informs them in
advance of the safety
precautions that are in place
for their safety or protection
from COVID these include two
part health screenings for
everyone entering the courthouse
discretes consistence ten
screening questions and
temperature checks there's masks
provided from all jurors judges
and courts that there is a six
foot physical distancing
requirements in and around the
courthouse if six were
distancing is not possible
plexiglass rather barriers are
in place we have daily logs for
everyone who enters the court
room and this is maintained for
four weeks to accommodate
contact Tracy we can reconfigure
courtrooms to keep drawers at
least six feet apart from each
other we expanded cleaning and
sanitation in court rooms
lobbies restrooms and other
public spaces to include anymore
to our claim these are
sanitation sanitation of high
touch services we provided hand
sanitizer in all public areas
and signage to assist chores
with core protocols we limited
elevator and restroom occupancy
we provided all jurors with bags
which have amassed sanitizer pen
and a notepad and we also engage
in practices to avoid direct
exchange of documents with
jurors.
I'm happy to report that these
are experience so far seventy
percent of George who have been
summoned happy that have
appeared for service and this
was in the time frame from June
through October of twenty twenty
that's a spectacular appearance
right in these times we also
conducted surveys of jurors from
August to November of twenty
twenty those surveys we showed
up in that period of time that
ninety six point nine percent
said the courts made efforts to
minimize the risk of contracting
coronavirus virus well in the
courthouse ninety five percent
said they feel safe throughout
their jury service ninety five
percent indicated they received
good information about COVID
safety precautions are
implemented by the court in a
second survey which we conducted
from October fourteen to
November fourteenth of last year
ninety five percent said they
felt efforts were taken to
minimize the possibility of
contracting COVID nineteen all
in the courthouse ninety three
percent said they felt safe
within the courthouse and one
hundred percent said they saw
everyone they saw the courthouse
was wearing a mask.
Now before and during the
pandemic the judiciary complex
deficiencies and improvements
and let me just give you some of
some of the examples the jury
expanded the public's ability to
pay court obligations online in
District Court as a public has
been able to do in magistrates
courts courts have also expanded
their use of T. payment machines
for those who come to court
with regarding the filing we've
X. electronic finally has been
expanded from civil cases to
include criminal cases also also
to avoid finally paper documents
at the courthouse and for
greater efficiency we've also
initiated a centralized team
which now enters certain traffic
citations reducing the need to
have clerks at the courthouse to
enter citations.
A customer service call center a
centralized customer calls for
service call center is in Los
crucis has also been established
to provide basic information in
English and Spanish about court
services cases and compliance
with citations summonses and
warrants which res reduces the
need to go to the courthouse to
seek information online dispute
resolution resolution D. R. for
short allows plaintiffs and
defendants in landlord tenant
and that cases to file and
respond to claims online and
negotiate settlements assisted
by mediator when needed.
Parties may not take off work
and drive to the courthouse to
wait in line with other cases to
see a judge access to justice is
faster less expensive and more
predictable.
We have also created a new
method for governing the
judiciary those of you who are
may be familiar with what we
call the chief judge's Council
we have done away with the need
to charges Council last month
and we have not created what we
call the New Mexico judicial
council the executive committee
is starting to it's it's not
work right now as we speak and
we will have four committees
doing work for full time year
round up for the governance of
the judiciary they are not
working on their charters.
One thing I want to make clear
is the probate judges we're not
we're not part of chief chief
judges council but in
formulating the The New Mexico
judicial council if a decision
was made to include the probate
judges as a voting member as a
voting member now because of
this disparity I understand
there was an issue with this
committee last week on on a
budget on a bill presented by
judge Tom test act from the up
probate judges you know I need
to apologize to you all for that
I'm not blaming anyone for
anything that happened but it
was because of this disconnect
with the probate judges and
their their ability to be
connected with the governments
of the the the judiciary that
that was allowed to happen
hopefully we've taken measures
to avoid that from happening in
the future and I've spoken to a
judge passed act and he is now
working with the R. AOC point
staff on many bills that he's
going to seek to introduce.
Now if I may I'd like to address
our budget request and of our
budget priorities.
The recent special session cut
the judiciary's fiscal year
twenty twenty would budget by
three point seven three percent
and it also stripped away seven
hundred thirty six thousand nine
hundred dollars to fund I
statutorily created judgeships
we are asking this court to be
restored essentially resulting
in the flat budget for all our
courts some of our specific
priorities are as follows first
of all the I do judgeships.
In fiscal year twenty twenty one
the legislature created and
appropriated recurring funds for
five new judgeships based up on
workload study of the national
center for state courts judges
there's one judge provided to
the first judicial district to
to the second judicial district
want to the third and what to
the twelfth.
These positions other costs are
not discretionary because they
were created by statute the full
cost of these judgeships is one
point two three seven million
dollars a plus house bill one of
the special session stripped to
the recurring funding and made a
one time allocation of five
hundred thousand dollars to the
just Judiciary for these
judgeships for this year.
We are asking us our number one
priority but these funds be
fully restored as recurring
funds to each district again
that's the first second third
and twelfth judicial district.
Secondly pre trial services.
Judges always have the final say
on pre trial release in fiscal
year twenty the legislators with
legislative support the
judiciary initiated pilot
programs in Santa Fe San Juan
County using a data driven tool
called the public safety
assessment or PSA to assist
judges in measuring the
likelihood that an individual
arrested and charged with the
crime what one committed to do
crime if released especially
violent crime and to the
likelihood that the individual
will appear at future court
hearings.
Thank you dear sherry also
established a centralized
operations center and this is
the first of its kind in the
entire United States it
completes a criminal history
background check using state and
FBI databases and performs an
assessment a flight risk and you
deprivations middle.
A new criminal activity if an
individual who has been arrested
has released the results are
available to judges before a
defendant makes an initial
appearance in court to determine
conditions of release.
We know that pre trial services
works the UNM institute for
public research reviewed six
thousand four hundred cases
using the PSA and Bernalillo
county from July of twenty
seventeen to March of two
thousand nineteen so much
findings are as follows more
than four out of five defendants
in Bernalillo county were not
arrested for a crime bill on pre
trial release second ninety six
percent were not accused of a
violent crime while released
third eighty three percent had
no new criminal activity of any
kind and we learned that
something as simple as a text
message sent by pre trial
services for reminder for a
court hearing can reduce failure
to appear rates by twenty five
to thirty six percent.
In the pilot programs which the
legislature funded there was a
one thousand one hundred cases
open and closed with pre trial
release using the PSA.
In Santa Fe County there was a
ninety percent release right an
eighty nine percent appearance
rate in eighty seven percent
public safety right in San Juan
County there was an eighty three
percent release right eighty
nine percent appearance rate and
in eighty one percent public
safety right.
We're not seeking nine hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to
expand these evidence based
pretrial services in requests
Hidalgo Luna County switcher in
this sixth judicial district and
Dona ana county which is the
third judicial district
appropriating these funds will
save counties money.
Well in his public safety and it
will reduce we arrest me just
give you an example in
Bernalillo county it costs a
hundred and average of a hundred
eight dollars a day to detain a
person at the metropolitan
detention center while the cost
nine dollars and forty point
cents per day with the average
cost of Bernalillo county for
pre trial staff and drug testing
costs
but that which does not include
electronic honoree.
Our third priority is security
for magistrates courts.
Recent events have once again
demonstrated the need to provide
for the security of our public
buildings and employees.
Our judges and employees who
work in our magistrate court
houses all across New Mexico are
particularly vulnerable recent
news accounts related that
possible targets were
courthouses and at the time we
took the best precautionary
measures we could to provide for
the safety of our employees and
the people using the courthouses
it is been rightly said that it
is not a matter if there's going
to be an attack at a courthouse
but when.
Indeed the clear need for
security at these courts has
been repeatedly expressed to the
legislature we believe and hope
you agree that the tired Act on
this dire need is now.
LCS made a special request of
fiscal year twenty two of eight
hundred thousand dollars to
provide security a magistrate
court statewide I implore you on
behalf of our judges and court
employees to provide them with
this minimal security they so
much need.
Anecdotally I remember when I
was in private practice I'd go
to some of these magistrates
courts out the middle of you
know know where the small towns
and villages and with no
security whatsoever there was
the judge and perhaps one staff
member of doing their job with
the no security place
whatsoever.
It struck me as it struck me at
the time in a still strikes me
today.
Our fourth priority is the V.
not cop great do not The New
Mexico State is the secure
connection established by the
judiciary between courts and
jails all across the Mexico this
allows judges to conduct
hearings involving arrestees in
custody using remote remotely
using video technology this is
been proven to be essential for
course to be able to continue
providing due process to these
individuals during the pandemic
and this will be a key of
efficiency of hours after the
pandemic.
Yes he is asking for two hundred
and seventy thousand dollars to
upgrade and integrate the
project continuation which
includes replacing cameras in
detention centers and digit.
Forth I mean we have what we
call the data exchange program
this program next originated in
two thousand nineteen when the
legislature wisely directed the
New Mexico sensing Commission to
create and maintain a data
sharing network to provide debt
to promote data sharing
information among criminal
justice agencies the part that
was rolled out in June of twenty
twenty which includes New Mexico
court data for multiple data
sets such as open or active
warrants release orders
conditions of release domestic
violence orders orders of
protection this disposition at
sentencing and landlord and
tenant convictions and for
example there is an active
warrants a street map which you
can access it shows you
everywhere in the state or in
the county where there's an
active warrant.
Existing.
There's also a I'm not showing
court hearings during the
pandemic which shows how many
hearings are being conducted how
many hearings are set per month
the number of hearing by type in
the number of hearings per day
this system is cloud based there
is no impact on the justice
partner database currently the
project includes San Juan county
sheriff point arrests bookings
booking sheets traffic citations
D. W. I. N. traffic citations it
also has Bernalillo county and
DC animated appropriations.
Justice partners will hope
hopefully eventually include
district attorneys the public
defender's the department of
public safety Law Enforcement
Administration corrections
mental health and probation and
supervision the value of this
tool first public safety of with
all of these agencies being able
to access and share this
information is self evident.
We're asking money for money to
keep the project moving forward
to increase the number of both
both data sets and the number of
agencies other than the
judiciary who can share the data
we're asking two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for this
purpose these are the priorities
of the G. Judiciary the unified
budget this year thank you for
the opportunity to present them
to you and I'm happy to answer
any questions that you may have
with Ortiz assistance and those
of you that know me know that I
can use all the help I can get
so thank you again for the
opportunity and I stand ready
for questions.
Thank you Chief Justice.
We.
Director figure out how to see
who wants to be recognized by
members.
Can I see it show of hands of
members those who wish to be
placed on the speakers list.
I miss anybody wish to be
recognized what questions.
I believe my missing anybody.
Senator Stewart is raising her
hand all right center store
thank you.
Our store.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to really thank the the
chief justice and our judiciary
in general for what they've done
this last year to try to keep
our courts are open and
operating is not slow down
justice when we we can't just
slow it down I've been in of the
Senator proceedings and I just
want to thank you for what
you've done you've really been
role models for the rest of
state government and you've
taken it seriously and I just
think because New Mexico seems
to be making such progress with
with that almost half of our
committees now at least in
yellow or green are counties I
mean in yellow or green it just
seems hopeful that we are going
to manage to get our schools
back to get our economy back and
it's really taken all of us
to ourselves to the CDC COVID
safe practices so it seems like
the judiciary is just bent over
backwards to make sure that that
can happen and I just want to
appreciate that and thank you
all for doing that I don't
really have any questions I
think that was a great they're
all report and I appreciated
getting the documents before
hand so thank you so much Chief
Justice for for what you said
today.
Thank you Senator us the story
of really appreciated thank you.
Senator Stewart can you tell me
what's being asked recognized by
show of hands anyone else.
Senator all right let me think
finishing with you just let's
get back to work I want to echo
what Senator Stewart said.
more than any agency or branch
of the government it seems to me
from afar the court it is done
everything will the state as
functional as possible.
very little time down very
little time completely shut down
and it seems as though only when
completely necessary of course
given the consequences to people
in our state with the court does
shut down I think that that we
do all of that is really very
commendable.
I would like to ask a question I
need to talk about.
Reorganization without the chief
judge's Council could you could
you just expand on that a little
bit knows what is going to
replace it what is the reason
for abandoning that and and
let's recognize first well there
are several members of the
committee who are not lawyers
and who are join the committee
for the first time so it may be
useful for you to explain how
you've done in the past and how
are you going to move for the
future to make sure that the
courts all around the state are
heard recognize that involved as
partners with you.
Thank you Mr chairman what we
had in place previously was what
we call the chief judge's
Council which was composed of
the chief judge of the
thirteenth judicial districts
and the of metropolitan court.
For the that district and
metropolitan judges associations
were also members as well as
representation from the
magistrate courts.
That committee that body was
mainly of thank you
recommendations and it it it it
screen well one of its main
process purposes was to screen
recommendations made by the
budget committee which screen
first of all the budgets of
every single chord throughout
the state put together a single
unified budget the chief judge's
then acted on that the proposed
unified budget of making
enquiries cross examining the
different judges the different
changes making them justify
their request and betting how
does all of those budget request
sending them in terms of the
unified budget proposal to the
Supreme Court which then
underwent that the scrutiny of
the unified budget again and
that's really the unified budget
that you have before you in this
legislative session this year
what we what we propose doing
isn't making everything more
uniformed up through the need to
a judicial council this is going
to include additional members
which were prepared for not
excluded but we're trying to
make it more ground based
meaning coming from the local
jurisdictions.
Moving up through the judiciary
through the judicial council
which would then meets quarterly
and makes recommendations to the
Supreme Court with the
presumption that whatever the
judicial council is recommending
will become the policy of of the
judiciary statewide that's the
goal we're trying to to reach
here before it has been more top
down from the Supreme Court down
to the local level we're just
trying to build build it up from
the ground up going going to the
Supreme Court with of course the
to Supreme Court of retaining
ultimate responsibility for
everything that happens so what
that's the big shift we're
trying to make and have the
chief judges more involved in
the.
So we say day to day management
decisions and that need to be
made
up for the judiciary as a whole
well acting together as a
unified group we're going to
have four subcommittees of that
work year round on different
aspects for example budget of
rules of.
Of the safety of the courts and
so forth and up they will then
report to the Executive Council
and the Executive Council will
we'll go from there so that's
the vision that we have and
we're just starting now and
we're very excited about it and
I know the chief judges are very
excited about it and we're we're
rolling our sleeves up now
trying to get to work.
Very good thank you checked.
One of the things you discussed.
But I think it's just taking a
few more minutes talk about.
Which is that we in our last
regular session.
Approved I knew judgeships
around the state at the time we
expanded the judiciary budget.
Hey the salaries of those judges
and provide them with the one or
two point staff members I
recall.
Up for those I you positions.
Of course when things looked but
for us financially
in our special session during
the last year we came in and cut
the funding for those positions
are not what what what we got
about probably out.
But we we cut the funding
substantially for those
positions and yet the law was
such that the positions were
created the governor appointed
judge those positions and there
was no funding for those.
and so if I got my facts right
and not a cheap and if so I want
to encourage our members you're
to be working with people of the
budget committee.
Recognize that we can't create
judgeships judge of that are
badly needed and then and that's
where the funding for them
because the judgeships are once
created our our our our place in
the.
The salaries and the resources
need to be committed I get my
facts posted right there yes yes
Mr chairman and but I would
emphasize this the funding has
to be recurring funding because
the the judgeships are there
every year you know for the
future and then dispatched a one
time thing it's a one point two
million dollars rounded out to
fully fund the monarch recurring
basis
and their staffs so thank you
for thank you for that
observation I really sincerely
appreciate it and that's what
we're one that's our number one
priority this year.
I appreciate that I just.
I know a lot of us on this
committee or talking about
trying to make sure that the
budget process the finance
process as a more close
resemblance to the policy
objectives of this committee
another other criminal justice
and justice our policies that we
adopt the committee and and
recognize that it all the state
state funding we've got to make
sure that we're working together
not against each other.
There anyone else that you just
go look at anyone of us the
right.
before we conclude with the
Chief Justice.
Okay senator Morris situation
recognized.
Thank you Mr chair and I
apologize for not going before
you as I'm technical issues are
no it's our protocol what lets
you go last I appreciate you let
me jump in afterwards
justice it blows me that since I
have you here obviously in
Albuquerque around New Mexico my
constituents I've just been.
Credibly worried about the crime
that is been going on around the
state certainly Bernalillo
county with four murders in
twenty four hour period are with
this recently seventeen murders
in the month of January it's out
of control what it feels like
Albuquerque's burning and I know
it's I represent Albuquerque so
that's where my concern is are
right now but it's happening
throughout the state of New
Mexico but it's really bad in
Albuquerque what I mean so but
those we what can we do to work
with you on in the courts to to
get this crime issue under
control sometimes still feels
like the politicians are just
federally and Albuquerque's
burning right now so we'll give
us some guidance what would you
like to see to help get this I
got a control not sure you're
actually where you live Justice
but I'm not sure if you're not
occurred or not but it's it's
that we need your help what do
you what which recommendations.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the question Senator
I where I would begin is this
look at the budget request that
the judiciary's making so that
it can it's it's asking for
money that it needs to do its
job.
And the that's where I would
begin is carefully scrutinize
those request so that the
judiciary can be adequately
funded to do its job we're only
what part of the whole
structure of now.
Part of that you to that request
that we have before you now in
this session it's a request to
expand pre trial services and we
know we know from from studies
that have been done that it
enhances public safety and
adequately funded pre trial
services program doesn't hands
public safety and it saves money
so that's where I would begin we
don't ask for extra judges
unless we act absolutely need
them I mean we got to judges and
Bernalillo county last go round
we have to this study show we
actually needed I and and that's
just an example so
how do you have anything that
that to that.
The trooper are also mentions
senator Morris in the committee
that as you well know a lack
rate increases next year
economic opportunity economic
downturns and crime go up in
Albuquerque for example using
the second District Court asking
for money for their expand our
mortgage foreclosures were lucky
that an expanded so that people
in trouble with their mortgages
have an opportunity either work
it out and you know just a
better opportunity than it there
on Representative and a lot of
those that's been an extremely
successful program allowing
people to stay in their homes
and we know that that's an
important driver stability in
your in your living environment
is an important driver on prime
or not increasing crime and it
is so contrary Albuquerque show
water rates of crime decrease in
although the violent crime and
murder is I have to agree
Senator course it's very
worrisome
the courts are in the business
of of protecting public safety
while we carry on our business
you know educate basis as best
we can and that's addicted
should were very ready touched
on your job services and from
all area.
Work went out those people who
can stop our work and keep up
their direct payments and things
thank you in detention of the
people that really
additions to delegate educated
because their dentures
and not I I have family my
daughter lives in Albuquerque
and I know that you disciplines
in Albuquerque we're not we're
quite aware of the problem and
we're trying to run our fortune
awaited dresses.
Our I really appreciate that RT
RT amount and I didn't realize
that you trust that your novel
resistance you know what we're
talking about talent it's it
just feels like it's getting
worse and worse and worse in the
last.
Every year it seems to get worse
and worse session last few years
and
I'll leave it there Chief
Justice appreciate your comments
and it's not gonna cost more
than just money I believe in the
magic bullet or a choice words
what is a magic wand
things would be different so
expect your dresses thank you
lord.
Thank you for the question
appreciate it.
Senator Stewart.
Yes I'm sorry Senator Stewart
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman for
letting me go again I just
wanted to ask the Chief Justice
if the judiciary has been before
the finance committee yet this
year.
Yes we were before the age.
HSC Representative are are
requests there and we were also
invited and did appear before
the Senate finance committee
kind which is unusual as I
understand it from private
practice a week we have appeared
before both of those bodies yes.
So Mr Chairman and Mr Chief
Justice did you do that recently
I just want to do the finance
committee to remember and
understand what happened to the
judiciary in the special session
did you remind them about that
and ask them to reinstate those
cuts absolutely yes ma'am and
and before HFA HFC each chief
judge appeared there and that
made the same request to replace
those cuts it is it's not a
matter of in that it was not a
matter just because you took
away money now please put it
back it was just it was
justification place alongside
each week each request that was
made so yes ma'am that was done
thank you for asking.
But Mr chairman I I I hate it I
hate to say this but I'm I don't
really my concern is not HFC my
concern is the Senate so did you
talk to the Senate finance
fairly recently.
Yes yes wasn't already these
days are all going together on
the.
I think that was last Friday but
it could have been this week I'm
sorry okay.
Well you guys sound like
legislators because I can't
remember what day it is the only
reason I know it's Friday is
that I get to go home tonight
maybe.
So all right well just I wanted
to make sure that you'd had your
a session before the Senate
finance so that we know that you
have given them of this request
also so thank you so much for
that thank thank you senator.
Anyone else.
Members.
Senator all right thank you just
a second thanks to this
experience so we've been what
sure I think it's going to
change a lot of how we operate
this lawyers permanently I
probably take about a hundred
more deposition sister by still
and I I really appreciate the
fact that the court has been so
creative and quick with the.
Thank you and procedures a
process so I all of our calls
are to propose to you Sir thank
you thank you thank you Mr
chairman and we all of we owe it
to our chief judges and our
employees throughout the
throughout the state they were
able to help us get through this
move us through this pandemic
and I can't thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak and
visit with you here today.
Well I'm.
We'll regret it you won't be
addressed in the fall our
chamber houses this year but
will look forward to your
remarks next year so thank you
again.
The business of the committee.
Beginning with Senate bill for
what you're chief it's just it's
just so.
Senator Ivey Soto you have the
first bill on our agenda.
Mr chairman Mr members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee we
have center number number number
four before you today which is
related to redistricting Senate
Bill number for our.
On one hand I actually
this bill actually doesn't do
anything with them I was
incredibly important and and and
some of the cracks one and not
as which makes everything else
necessary is on page five lines
fourteen and fifteen whether it
Representative changes the R.
the the time frame for the
secretary of state look at the
investment properties in
batteries done instead of no
later than June thirty of the
same year on the census is is on
ninety to in no later than
ninety days following receipt of
the results of the federal
decennial census I'm normally we
get the results of the final
sentence census.
No later than April first of the
year ending in the number one.
However this year are we are
what what what we know is that
that date will not be observed
and as a matter of fact just
additional four hours ago we got
a a notice from the our our our
census bureau a plumbing notice
that the our results of the
federal decennial census on
won't be distributed until at
least September thirtieth of
this year.
So we're probably looking at
spending thanksgiving Christmas
once that time together.
We're we're visiting.
and so.
Present time frame and we're
just simply providing some
guidance for local governments.
Discussion that we had in the
Senate rules committee I do
have.
Sure it's not one of them that
is our that is on the Energy
house and Mr chairman there are
two
One of the first when we could
take public comment first
whichever you prefer.
Check the amendment etcetera.
So
that you'll see on the screen
there before you.
Our is is a member of the on
page seven.
While two of the battle.
The fact our our our.
Constructs not language at the
end of our.
What also means.
Our subsection now instead of
sending.
I'm sorry second.
Insurance at the right place yes
they are
instead of saying.
that that we're coverage all of
the services dissertation
operate or we don't drop
districts some of the provisions
of section and I was standing
there staring across the country
contrary.
And we're what we're getting at
with the timelines and and in
rural senator Morris pointed out
that we're using that four
letter word notwithstanding in
the bill and that we should our
friend the way around that so
we've done that in turn by just
simply speaking up in a
clarifying that what we're
saying is really
that we want to do it this one
but I'm lines.
Our in this section.
And then just write the rest of
that sentence.
Clarifies what we're we're we're
talking about and I really
appreciate
the comments from the rules
committee in order to get that
focused the other thing is that
Michael sharp who is the deputy
director of research apartment
was on contract with legislature
reached out to me about the
technical definition of meaning
in terms of the denominator and
so we've just got we've got to
our fixes their number three
four where it would instead of
divided by the number of active
governing body members of St
divided by the number of
districts from which I worked on
upon which number in members are
elected all in the blueprints
between those two statements
that in we have our a former
municipality.
Our.
Where are the best let's use of
the president faces of the state
where you have to city council
selected from each district
actually staggered within within
each district and so so it just
it just helps our pride about
purpose so Mr Chairman I would
offer
I'm in the number one Senator
number for.
Thank you Sir Ivy Soto
Representative are you aware of
any opposition to the proposed.
Thank you committee members on
the proposed.
AS a motion also it committee
members who wish to be heard on
the amendment itself right
questions definitely would you
identify anyone who is shown to
be up to be recognized.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Germany Representative Warren
and I and I.
We got this one in the band of
battle the printer the one but
it's a relatively simple one I
think an on the fly and that is
on page two.
Our between the lines nineteen
and twenty this is what we use
for the standard base maps the
boundaries that are shown simply
answered a new number sex.
Mention tribe and pueblo
Andreas.
Some.
And then remember.
After that.
So it'll be a new number six
Indian nation tribe and pueblo
boundaries some I. programs
remember the succeeding
paragraphs.
Candidly there aren't any on the
Senator bridge match because
that's one of the requirements
of federal law
but there was a request I don't
drink milk from public comment
the rules committee indicated I
don't think you'd be a problem I
did check with Mister stroke are
online and available to ask
questions if anybody does have
them but he said that that that
would be it would make a
difference to include that
language in here because it's
already provided for affects.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
is indicating a desire to speak
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator maybe maybe this is a
questions for a Mr sharp how do
that have any impact on the
checkerboard area or tribal
lands are are contiguous.
If you get if you're saying
within the boundaries of that
affect women not contiguous and
and I'm thinking of the
checkerboard areas.
Thank you Mr chair senator
Morris that I believe this
amendments is only related to
what's shown on the map so
whatever data we have with
respect to the hello or new
American lands that is provided
by the sense of that information
can be added on to whatever maps
are created.
Anything else center German.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir Moores.
First on the second proposed.
I believe you have.
All you'll know if you don't
have it.
Right is there any is there any
objection production of the
second amendment.
Rewards for.
All right I see no objections.
Mr Chairman or Mr vice chairman
of the joint account having at
school.
Yes I just have a question this
time Sir.
I'm sorry to that place Sir.
You look public comment and then
stand for questions at this time
all right.
I will just sit around you are
you there.
He is.
Yes I am no longer muted I am
right here Senator would you
checked chair to handle public
comment part of this bill please
in the vote thank you Mr rose
thank you Mr chairman and I will
say with public comment you know
we've got a lot of bills so it's
ten minutes for ten minutes
against so keep your comments to
under two minutes please and
will cut you off.
So I'm zoom Meister mistress can
you let in the first person and
clarify with its opposition or
support.
Are you sure we don't have any
public comment for technical
support Kerry with that
simplifies things now to the
committee we go do we Mr chair
second second okay so is there
any opposition to the deep pass
motion.
Senator Ivey Soto Mr Chairman
with the bow tie you have a pass
to pass on this thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee thank
you.
Okay.
Well twenty two Sir.
Yes we have Senate bill twenty
two vehicle drivers yet to the
right away of bus representative
Gonzales.
Can you join us.
Senator Gonzales is and finance
okay so let's move on and so we
have I'd senator Tom and number
thirty nine Senate bill thirty
nine.
Back okay so how about Senate
bill forty six.
We have
yes I knew we would have Senator
Padilla okay Senate bill forty
six Senator Padilla you're up.
Okay hi everybody can you hear
me yes okay I just got a new
headset I want to make sure it's
working thank you very much
members of the committee Mr
chairman Mr chairman Mr vice
chairman all the other chairman
and all the programs and all
everybody thank you very much
for having us today and the
Senate bill forty six pretty
simple it just permits licensed
practical nurses and registered
nurses employed by an opioid
treatment facility to to
dispense as much as twenty seven
a twenty seven day supply of
methadone to agency client they
have to have all of the normal
required certifications and
requirements are all part that
taken care of they have to have
all that in place
there states that around us that
are already doing that including
Colorado Maryland Washington in
California and a few others I
have two or these facilities
personally just to make sure and
what's the the process
I watched the process incognito
if you will and then I watched
the process from behind the
counter just to make sure I
understood what they were up to
and how this is working and so
we do have an expert witness
with us I apologize I don't know
if he's here yet I know that Mr
Martinez here is one of the
registered experts for this
presentation I'm gonna ask him
to go ahead and take take be the
Mike for just a second I don't
see our other expert on I I
don't know maybe he thought he
had a little more time to jump
on because we can skip over a
couple of bills but it should've
been ready I'd like Mr Martinez
to say a few words thank you Mr
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
quitting my name's Eric Martinez
on the a lobbyist for on New
Mexico seeking services our New
Mexico junction and services are
the biggest opioid treatment
provider within the state of New
Mexico we support this
legislation because it it helps
us catch up with a particular
this particular issue of modern
and efficient practices which
are being conducted all
conducted in our neighboring
states
including Texas all Colorado
Arizona and right now with the
pandemic duties going on which
require this practice requires
pharmacists to actually just
simply stealing package deliver
the take home methadone
pharmacists are ready right now
to actually conduct this this
simple practice a pharmacist
would still be involved in
providing the dosages but and
they can do that via telehealth
correct but right now with the
way these older statutes are
written in a pharmacist would
actually have to be physically
present to ought to packaging
seal this up this taken
methadone which the nurses
already do for the at for the at
the window a type of a practice
for the for the impatient of.
So with that I have a Christina
what is here I think and she's
the expert she is the executive
director for New Mexico
treatment services.
Thank you.
Is she still on hold and has
been let all that into the into
the hearing okay our cat can we
let her in.
Hi Mr chair I just let her into
the I'm I apologize have her
name on my list earlier okay
thank you can't.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
Christine if you want to.
Chime in Erica going to person
direction.
Thank you very.
I can thank you I apologize I
was waiting and the the chat
room still
And I was watching live so
there's a little bit of a lag I
do apologize.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Christine allies I am the
executive director for New
Mexico treatment services and I
don't have F. further statement
or anything to add I do stand
for questioning thank you
Christina okay so Senator
Padilla chairman what do we have
we're ready to go to public
comment absolutely Mexico so I
can't do we have to start with
the opposition and again ten
minutes for each side.
do we have anybody in
opposition.
Mr chair we do not have anybody
for public comment on SB forty
six I'm not even in support of.
Mr okay so to the committee we
go I'm seeing I'm sorry I've
just looked at the screen I
don't know if
representative do acre senator
Morris was first
but I I'm gonna go ladies first
Senator doing.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I'm I want I want to
understand how.
This hello the methadone is
being dispensed right now and
not not in an inpatient setting
but but because this would be
this would be something that's a
that's given folks to use an out
patient.
That is correct so how how is
being dispensed now and and how
would this change from how it
how it how it's happening now
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator do they have an
interesting to walk through a to
the what happens today if
senator after them what what
we're proposing here what would
change about that.
Senator Padilla so currently our
nurses are dispensing the
medication to the patients at
the window it is outpatient so
this daily and they have the
opportunity to earn what we call
take out
or staff level so that they can
reduce their attendance
with things like good behavior
pa favorable drug screens third
meeting the counseling sessions
the length of time that they've
had in treatment so our nurses
are able to
what we call in our world
dispense the medication in bulk
form.
Putting it in a bottle for the
patient to drink in front of
them at the window.
the requirement of a pharmacist
to is that he takes that same
book form and put it in that
same bottle the only differences
according to regulation he is
allowed to put a label on it and
a cap in order to seal that
medication and call it a unit
dose
and so.
What we are requesting is that
the nurses have the ability to
do the same thing they currently
are doing this daily.
I'm with the patients that
present at the window and take
that medication in front of them
I'm essentially they would be
doing the exact same thing based
on their.
to step level it could go
anywhere from just the weekends
currently all the way up to
twenty seven K. come units.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
but what.
At my am I correct in thinking
that one of the reasons that you
have the patience take it there
in front of you is because of
concerns about diversion
concerns that that if people are
taking the method on there in
front of you it might not
necessarily be used to use the
way it's supposed to be used by
the patient and could instead be
be sold on I I I've had a couple
of seconds psychiatrists tell me
that they have real concerns
about diversion the spell and
that this would would open up to
methadone.
Being being sold on the street
rather than used as prescribed
by the patient and and that's
that's my big concern about
this.
So one of the things that that
you know that agency what is
actually talked about with you
have to earn the ability to get
to that point they do some of
this already today but the
pharmacist actually does that
but you have to to to to step
your way up to demonstration
that you utilize to the way that
you were supposed to but you get
returned in the condition that
you were supposed to and that
you and you without like okay so
today I wanted I want to take on
twenty seven does this today the
first time I meet you it doesn't
work that way at all there
there's a history I'm at the
Christina talk a little bit more
about that but that's my
understanding contributed Mr
chairman and senator do you
think that you have to work your
way up to that sort of a.
an ability to to demonstrate N.
and that's also building
confidence if you will in the
individual because you're
trusting them you're allowing
them to take control of
themselves and their efforts in
their actions would have you
Christine if you have a little
bit more that I try to cover
that well enough.
Absolutely thank you again at
Senator Padilla Hey he is
correct they are earned nobody
comes in immediately and just
receives take homes or unit
doses and can take the
medication out of the building
currently and I do understand
the concern of diversion
currently there so we're still
allowing unit doses this is and
a change feature that we're
trying to add into the clinic
a pharmacist is essentially just
preparing those units instead of
a nurse which were asking that a
nurse would be able to prepare
those units or added to the list
rather
With the current stock level in
our clinics we do have different
procedures and protocols in
place we do things like call
backs where a patient has to
return to the clinic and show us
their bottles I'm so that we can
physically lay eyes on them make
sure that they're taking the
doses accordingly Act has
prescribed by a doctor make sure
that all the medication is there
there still sealed there was no
tampering with them and anybody
that feels that call back for
whatever reason actually loses
their step level and they have
to essentially start all over
again I'm and begin to earn that
trust again to not have to
attend the clinic daily we do
have patients.
That unfortunately you know have
had issues I'm Dave maybe have
gotten lost or stolen and we
have different procedures in
place for that as well we do
require that they file a police
report we do get the police
involved our medical director is
involved and that patient
actually has to does with us
daily for anywhere from thirty
to ninety days in order for them
to earn and get that staff level
back so.
diversion protocols in place and
we monitor this closely we are
always looking for ways to you
know assess how can we make this
process a more attractive and.
Not only taking contents
generation the patient safety
public safety as well.
Thank you I really appreciate
you you explain all those
diversion protocols and and the
semi great protocols.
Are those
so I understand that that's
what's happening in your clinic.
Is there is other any regular is
there anything in place that
that makes those standardized
practices.
At any clinics where methadone
would be being distributed I got
because it's it's a great
practice where you are but but I
I just wonder if that's a
practice that is standardized
across the state.
Sure.
Mr Chairman then respond.
Yes.
Thank you I'm there is a
standard
federal practice and so it is it
does speak to in our federal
guidelines that we are are
required to follow dark title
seven which is our the state of
New Mexico state guidelines
also requires that we have a
diversion plan in place when we
are audited by the HSD D. O. H.
or
the DEA they also ask for these
plans and so we're able to show
them one our plan and to how we
put this into effect and how we
document this so all of the
clinics in New Mexico are
required to are in all states I
should say are required to have
a diversion control plants has
something to that effect.
Thank you and so Mr chair
representative of all what Y.
twenty seven days.
Thank you great question I I
don't know the answer to that
one so I will ask Christina
who's in the state every single
ever live.
Thank you again and then good
question so I know that twenty
seven it seems like a big number
and I'll tell you our policy
around it a patient has to be
enrolled in treatment for at
least three years and have to
have at least two years a
favorable drug screens meaning
no illicit drugs present I'm in
order to earn to twenty seven
staff level they also have to
meet the eleven point criteria
set forth by the state of New
Mexico
with different things like no
legal activities no
you know they're working they
have healthy social boundaries
your living environment is
healthy and we work with our
counselors to monitor these
these type of things so they can
get up to twenty seven they
start as small as well step one
which is just our Sunday doses
for closures.
So.
The and and Mr chair senator I
just.
I might be asking the same
question again because I just
want to make sure I I I totally
understand what this bill is
doing.
Everything about the step
program and this twenty seven
day.
Take home that you could work up
to.
None of that is created by this
bill is that correct.
The practices that are are
already in place is that right.
Thank you Mr chairman and
intended the the twenty seven
day is not in place right now
but it might just be it you know
what I should allow Kristina
dances but if that's not a place
this would allow them to go up
to the twenty eight.
Twenty seven twenty seven
Davidson twenty Christine if you
want to add in.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative.
so that that is incorrect these
these
practices are are already in
place with this bill what we are
asking is that a nurse can be
added to the list of the
authorized people that can
create the unit doses which is
up to twenty seven take comes so
instead of us having to utilize
a pharmacist to what we call in
our world pre pack these unit
does is and then we store all of
these unit does is in our saves
that when the patient presents
at the window we essentially can
happen since create these on
demand for those patients that
have earned that staff level and
again please just follow
according to doctor's orders so
our doctor has to approve.
Order and for that patient and
then the nurse can turn complete
and fill that Unidos order for
that patient instead right now
currently we're using a
pharmacist to do that exact same
thing.
Thank you Mr Senator are are
there any other medications that
nurses are currently allowed to
fill building unit dose to it
are there any other medications
that that nurses can do this
with now.
Thank you Mr chairman I am not
aware Eric Christina that that
excellent question I I don't
have the answer to that will
bring.
What Christine you have to for.
Thank you I'm currently
according to board of pharmacy
rags no they are not allowed to
do this at the moment what we
are asking is that they can fill
this with methadone or
buprenorphine which is the
generic for Sabah oxen and sent
me text.
Thank you Mr Senator at.
I I it and it makes.
I see the the efficiency that
you're you're you're trying to
get to hear and and the more
folks can.
Inefficiently get medications
that help them have successful
treatment the better and and I
get that I do have concerns that
it sounds like this is this
would be a significant expansion
of of scope of practice for
nurses that I know limited to to
these medications but.
But that is a big a big staff
So I'm.
Just trying to figure out how I
feel about that but but the
shares Senator Christina thank
you.
Mr chair if I may this though
the language in the legislation
clearly states that that the
scope of practice is only for
teepees which their opioid
treatment providers so only
within these do a regulated
facilities are these nurses
going to be allowed to actually
packaging dispensing would be a
school throughout the entire
type of all practices that that
nurses conduct if you look at
the bill it actually just states
that it's only gonna be within
TEP's local location facilities
which there's a total of sixteen
in the entire state.
Ask your question I'm sorry
Representative Romans I'm.
Just one more it because you
mentioned so the way it is now
you have to have it in the state
I so how what would be different
about how these medications are.
I mean would they not be stored
in a safe like what.
At what what what would they be
more vulnerable to to potential
misuse or diversion I mean even
apart from the patient's side
with with what's being proposed
here.
Chairman Christina please thank
you Mr chairman Senator Padilla
and in fact it's the opposite
because these unit does is our
pre packed by the pharmacist
during small little bottles that
have to be accounted for daily
and those are what set in the
safe with all of our big book
bottles right and so essentially
diversion is more possible and
likely with carrying out a small
little bottle which is a unit
does
I'm sorry unit as rather than a
giant bowl Paadal right and so
the president would still be
stored or people are being still
stored in the safe it's just
remains in the book form and we
only break it down to the unit
does form when the patient
actually presents to the window
and this is all created in front
of them with the nurse.
Mr Santa Fe part but the overall
storage of the methadone would
still be a part from being
broken out or not broken out
would still be held to the same
standard that it is now with
that a pharmacist involves that
correct.
Chairman I'll tell you I I I
don't I don't wanna get into
the the particulars I want to
pay anything that incorrect but
I watched in this actually
happened right in front of me
and the process was very tightly
controlled with measurements and
there were approved devices to
watch all of this and there were
multiple people had to be
available at the moment that
they were doing this to ensure
that everything was but but
Christine if you want to add
more
detail the.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator that that is correct to
so we would we'd still have to
abide by the federal and state
and
other guidelines that we have in
place that doesn't negate those
we still have different policies
and procedures in place and
monitoring functions in place so
all of the medication would
still remain in a safe nurses
would still function in daily
operations just start from just
pulling those unit does is from
the safe and handing the success
initially just handling handing
them to the patients.
Okay now for for real this time.
Okay Senator Moores you're up
next thank you Mr chair thank
you are Senator do ich great
minds think alike because I had
seen concerns you did especially
after reading Senator of the and
Eric
reading the F. I. R. an analysis
on this have you had
conversations with the nursing
board and are all the about
their concerns the sapphire come
out before the first committee
hearing or the come out
afterwards.
After.
And yet Mr Senator it came out
after and we and we we've we we
we would just these concerns and
it and and talking to all health
and in public affairs we got a
we we had a long conversation
with with the senator she's
regarding this was kind of a
little more familiar with this
this is he's in the medical
field well forty four full time
job and after everything was
verified we are we're able to
get get the the center support
regarding this was just a little
bit of clarification as to as to
how this works so basically what
this does is this work from the
pharmacist is is very very part
time work right this is this is
part time work for a for a
pharmacist to go into an OTP
throughout the entire state to
get this done in more of a in a
timely manner for these patients
that are on these on these
technical programs and my duties
table programs this is what when
they're honest on this table
program this that they're almost
done they're almost out of this
program right this is where they
were they're gaining the most
trustful from these teepees and
there and and the right to go
out and.
And and be completely up to all
independent from any type of any
type of treatment so this is
this is further down the line
once we were able to clarify
that the only thing that the
pharmacist needs to be present
for physically is to actually
packed kitchen CO these balls
methadone which which I stated
before in in other states these
things are distracted these
practices are already being
conducted so I guess that's the
that's the main thing to to try
to get things across in the most
concise mandala manner that I
can that I can say.
I
too on the business so let me
ask you this question is medical
billing code for distribution or
dispensing of this.
No.
Well there's Medicaid bill
billing codes in general to
begin with I don't think that
there would be any extra billing
I think Christina can answer
that a little bit better than I
can but there's already Medicaid
billing codes fall for this.
But in New Mexico I think
they'll remain the same as is is
that correct personal.
Act.
So Christine Senator Mr chair
senator Kristina there is
currently a
Medicare Medicaid I do also
build private insurance so there
is a code for dispensing this
not that.
That is correct and so what I
see is that as a business
decision we're replacing the
pharmacist
with licensed practitioner
nurse who dispenses with the
billing code then go down is our
last lower billing code for a
lower level scope of practice
provider which I assume would be
much less expensive to deploy
which you are expected lower
rate of reimbursement.
I know Sir David there it is the
flat rate whether it comes from
a pharmacist or a.
are in our LP and it we we bill
under the same exact code and
it's one standard rate so let's
or talk about really we're we're
getting rid of the pharmacist
and having a lower.
Expensive employee
Spence right.
I'm.
In a sense sure after the
billing side but more than
availability of the pharmacist
treatment on demand for our
patients.
Is is really how we are seeing
this.
Right.
I get the business of this thank
you thank you senator Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair
Thank you Senator Padilla and a
lot of my concerns have now been
brought forward Bible Senator
doing and Senator Moores
my concern is still
methadone is is a form of the no
opioid is it is it not Mr chair
and senator.
Yes.
And and I'm not really familiar
with methadone but does it is it
possible if you concerned enough
of this in these in this form
that we're talking about
dispensing for the a month's
supply is it possible to
I guess I have the same effect
as as the drugs that that these
people are are receiving
treatment for.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Center parliament ask Christina
to address that one but here
again I'm I'm not quite to think
you were here the whole time
Senator Pirtle but that their
been working up to this the
level of trust and it's been
patient dispensing model but
Christina can you at.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
the you can get a euphoria a
fact or a highway from taking
too much methadone
we start patients off at a very
low dose and it gradually can
climb to a therapeutic dose this
is monitored by our program
directors met physicians and
We don't our star anybody higher
than thirty milligrams the
national average is a hundred
and eighty milligrams as we have
seen that this is a therapeutic
dose that has helped people to
not be in withdrawal do not
crave and want to use and to not
have any side effects of
withdrawal that they can be
fully functioning with the take
comes again.
They earn these and so at
patient you know is meeting this
eleven point criteria which by
the way the federal and criteria
is eight the state of New Mexico
has eleven and so by them
meeting all of this criteria you
know we trust that the patient
is responsible to take the
medication as prescribed and
with our diversion policies in
place and just monitoring this
on it helps us to make sure that
that is in fact what's happening
patients are did you know are
taking too much medication or
over sedated our nurses are
trained to just ask each patient
every time that they are present
at the window and if they do
seem to be intoxicated you know
sedated or under the influence
of any type of other drug or
medication we do not Medicaid
that patient we actually come
around and lay eyes on them so
that they can be assessed if
this patient should be medicated
or not and our physician is at
that point alerted you know
should we proceed or not.
So Mr chair
Senator help how much would it
take of the twenty seven day
supply to get a high.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you I'm that that is
actually not a question that I
can answer every body
metabolizes different and has a
different tolerance and so you
know five milligrams to to me
could be a hundred milligrams
Teo so we can't really give an
actual number of when a patient
could be at risk of possible
overdose now if a patient for
whatever reason decided to take
you know all twenty seven
absolutely they would be at risk
of overdose and death
right with all of the things
that we have in place we've not
seen this happen in any of our
facilities and I do communicate
a lot with the other facilities
on this is just historically not
something that happens.
Representative coin if I may um
Senator you know I I know this
just for my work with this
agency house I've been to these
clinics with patients I mean
with clients with residents and
basically that's the reason I
have to go every day is because
it's closely monitored the
quantities so it's not like
you're gonna get a week's worth
of methadone in any that's the
whole point of these clinics in
a way is the light oversee the
dispensation of this harm
reduction approach to addiction
so so it's not as if from your
the they get a certain amount
each day and that's monitored by
the by the staff at these
clinics as well as the
pharmacist you know the
prescribing persons so there's
plenty of safeguards that way.
And I and I appreciate that Mr
chair I'm just trying to figure
out who you know when it comes
to these amounts I mean who has
the best training to ensure
you know what we're talking
about the amounts and and and if
it's five milligrams or one
hundred milligrams you know do
we want to go from a pharmacists
to has really extensive training
in chemistry and these things to
to a registered nurse that maybe
doesn't have the extensive
training and so that's where you
know I'm trying to figure out
where I'm at on this
Senator the nurses are following
the orders of the pharmacists
then the nurses are making
clinical decisions they're just
implementing the pharmacists.
May I may I insert actually
because our pharmacists do not
right the the perscription it
actually comes from our medical
director and so he is ultimately
responsible for
how much they're getting when
they get it and who gets an
increase or doesn't and again
he's looking at different
factors like drug screens
you know what are they reporting
at dinner by the nurses
One of the counselors reporting
before he makes the ultimate
decision to increase or not and
so our pharmacist in our
facilities is only following
that doctors order they made no
decision on whether a patient
goes up down on their does or
have received how many take
comes so there's essentially
just used to take that both form
into unit that is that.
And and thank you for that Mr
chairman and and again I think
maybe some of the hang up for a
lot of a lot of us I know it is
for me is that the twenty seven
day supply
is that just because of some of
the rural areas and and how hard
it is to get
maybe to these clinics with they
don't have driver's licenses or
a way to to go in for the take
home program is that the thought
process behind such a long
period of time.
Well but there again Mr Chairman
Senator Pirtle is what one of
the objectives one of the
reasons that this may be helpful
to some of these individuals you
know they first of all we'll
just keep repeating that that
they they work their way up to
and through trust through
demonstrations through good
stewardship of the the the doses
that they are given but but here
again when I was in the clinic
that twice but with the time
that I was there in on an
official capacity monitoring
what was happening some of the
questions I ask is why would
this be necessary at the some of
the some of the questions that a
lot of the folks here that lot
of the members here in the
committee of after
and and some of these folks have
a very hard time getting there
so they're going to work their
way up to make their life a
little more as they're trying to
get their lives back on track
having to show up at the clinic
every day when they're in this
condition is it that you know I
I don't I don't know how to put
it they made a mistake they
they've identified it they're
trying to find a solution trying
to help them there there the
situation get better but in some
cases that the herculean task to
get there every day and then
they've got you know potentially
in the because it is what it is
that they made the mistake of
trying to get their turn their
life around but they're dealing
with potential you know
employment they're dealing with
a child running the child around
everything that we all have to
deal with in our everyday lives
as well yes this is a mistake
that they made an error in this
program now but they're in the
program trying to get themselves
off of this this particular and
I don't I'm sorry Christine the
jump ahead either but if you
want to add to that.
Thank you senator and got some
very good points you know part
of our harm reduction module and
this is universal as we do not
want the patient's life to
revolve around the clinic part
of recovery is change and we
work with them to change their
behaviors you know at eight it's
a daunting task just ask Senator
Padilla had mentioned is to
revolve your life around this
clinic every single day
and in a short amount of time
because we only offer dosing
between five AM and eleven some
places twelve PM so we have
people rushing in on on their
break I'm trying to get with us
before they have to report to
work or drop the kids off so.
having them to work towards and
and build that trust with them
and to their own trust with
themselves and self esteem to
not have to attend the clinic as
much is ultimately what these
Unidos this is our our used with
and for it's it's really
motivational tool for patients.
And thank you Mr chair and
You know I think the answers are
are all quite a bit longer than
than they have to be but I do I
do appreciate that the
information
but you know to me I still think
twenty seven days seems seems
like quite a quite a Lee
because this if with we didn't
put twenty seven here then the
practice could continue if it
was done by
the pharmacist to do twenty
seven days or or whatever that
route that amount would be
but I I I I I understand
completely that these people
that we're talking about the
patients were talking about have
a turn their lives around the in
this but we're we're so we're
wanting to.
Do something that we don't do
anywhere else with any other
type of medication or or drugs
or anything and that's allowing
a nurse to do it so it's take
there's a little bit reservation
on my part to go from not at all
to twenty seven days
so maybe a shorter time period
for this policy would be a
better starting point but those
are just my opinions of.
Mr chair I don't I don't the
need to response thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you senator I Senator
Baca.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair just have a
couple of questions here
for the sponsor and or and his
expert so what type of dosage
are we talking about Mr chair is
to how many milligrams is.
The color what is the range I
guess that is prescribed.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
and to the minority leader there
and they're all different based
on body and you know what I
would rather have a professional
address I'm sorry Christine
agreement at.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator great question and so
they do very and it's based on
the patient's individualized
treatment so we're looking at
their drug history how long have
they been using on their
tolerance how fast a metabolite
those kind of things again
everybody starts at thirty
milligrams nobody gets to go
higher and then there does is
gradually built from there and
so typically hard drive will
stop them and eighty milligrams
and then want to have an
assessment completed with that
patient upon every increase from
there.
And so we're asking different
questions like you know what you
need is how much did you use was
the last time he is about what
time is your does wearing off
methadone and buprenorphine how
are designed to last at least
twenty four to forty eight hours
and so when they're at their
peak does that clock doesn't run
out until they're there the next
day to Medicaid
If they're not in a therapeutic
dose they can report that you
know just at a specific time of
day there there does just isn't
holding them.
Thank you for that Sir what what
it
I was just doing some brief
research you know and
everything's true on the
internet of course and so Mr
chair what I was looking at is
just a street value of some of
this stuff and and one of the
government agencies that listed
the street value anywhere from
twenty to fifty dollars for
thirty milligram dosage.
So what worries me I guess a
little bit that you know you'd
be putting over a thousand
dollars worth of street value
drugs
out.
dispense to an individual does
do you have do you have a
response that we had any trouble
with that have you seen that
before because that's a
significant amount of of value I
guess two of given to somebody
work could begin diverted to get
to the concern of us Senator
Duhigg
and be introduced to third
parties and maybe we don't we
don't want to have it the or
even a attractive to you for for
theft within a home even is is
that any concern at all or has
that been thought about thank
you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Christina.
Thank you Mr chairman the this
this has been thought out and it
is part of our diversion planned
I'll tell you different things
that we are do require patients
and they do have to bring a
locking container to store the
medication and that.
That part of the eleven point
criteria is that they can safely
store this medication so for
example if your home last you
know if you're living in a hotel
or your reporting that you know
you're in overcrowded home that
patient would not qualify for
staff level or for unit dose as
until they can properly and
safely secure the medication you
know unfortunately we have had
cases where somebody's car was
broken into and you know that
the lock box was taken
we do require the police report
to be filed we do report that it
is on the streets and that you
know the medication is out there
We have different safeguards in
place like the diversion call
back
pre COVID our patients were
actually required to return
there to unit dose bottles the
empties to us so that we can see
that they still had possession
of all of their medication and
it was one way for us to account
that this patient did in fact
take their medication safely and
as prescribed I'm and we were
discarded bottles ourselves
during the COVID we are not
asking that they bring them in
but we are continuing the
diversion callbacks we are
monitoring them closely and
surprisingly not
We have family members we have
different community per people
that have called our clinics and
say Hey I found a unit dose or
you know this medication I
thought I should let you know we
do collect the information of
that person or that is on the
label and we address that with
the patient they immediately
lose their stop level they're
not managing their take homes
and we we make sure that we are
following the regulations share
worry very closely there's no
diverting.
Thank you for that one of the
other questions I have
is yeah and you mentioned and I
won't even attempt to pronounce
it but you mentioned another
another I I guess I don't know
medication drug whatever want to
call it right.
But I would mention methadone
but you mentioned in the it's
buprenorphine okay so I noticed
that is a listed in your bill
here it it just ask for
methadone is a reason for that
Mr Chairman expert.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Christina.
Thank you Mr chairman so it was
mentioned as you've never seen
is actually not a schedule three
narcotic it is a schedule to and
it does not require the strict
regulations that a schedule
three like methadone does and so
in fact there regulations around
you but Arsene are a lot are
less strenuous and there is no
Protocol or any rule around the
people are seen in terms of
dispensing so we did not feel at
this time that we needed to at
this
to the current bill.
Mr chairman and exclude and
senator are you dispensing that
even more for you right now.
Is that what it is or or or is
that dispensed via pharmacists
stuff like that methadone is
how's that he dispensed right
now.
Christina please thank you I'm
so we are dispensing and people
are feeling is actually utilized
with a thirty day prescription
and so they our doctor writes
the prescription and they can go
to any external pharmacy to
actually fill that prescription
we still require the same
program contact such as
reductions counseling those kind
of fun things but it is not
currently being dispensed out of
our clinics.
Question Mr chair what when we
just utilize that program it
seems more flexible as it is
rather than introducing another
more stringently controlled the
arconic into the next year
search for.
Thank you Mr chairman Christina.
Thank you I'm so people are
seeing it has some different
side effects from methadone you
know it's really a preference it
has and it's supposed to do the
exact same thing has the same
science but we do have reports
from patients that Hey I'm not a
successful people are free that
I am on methadone on it just
doesn't work for me I can't get
stable I still have the desire
to use and so the methadone
historically and whether it be
more psychological than actual
science has been the preference
for most opioid addicts.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
couple more things here so I
just want to be real clear one
thing because it seems like
we've kind of danced around it
but I don't know if the question
was just straight out asked so
I'm Mr chair and Senator expert
is the twenty seven dosage the
twenty seventeen dosage
available right now so they
worked up to that point the
committee go get that right now
from another source.
Mr chairman and Christine and I
can get it from you right from
what if they if the pharmacist
is involved that actor that is
correct we do have patients that
are receiving up to twenty
seventy comes on again they go
from step one to step twenty
seven and these patients have
earned to this with at least
three years of of time in
treatment and at least two years
of favorable drug screens so
they can't have any positive
illicit drug use in that two
year time frame in order to be
eligible just to receive the
twenty seven
so patients just coming off the
streets they're not getting
twenty seven take comes they
start out daily dosing and in
fact the federal and state
regulations allow every ninety
days that a patient if they meet
that eleven point criteria can
advance and stop level our
policy is that they have to wait
the first ninety days so that we
can make sure that they are
stable we've made multiple
contacts with them before we
even start that clock.
Thank you Mr chair and I think.
That's probably the my final
question is it concerns me a
little bit I just Mr chair and
and senator next for the the the
it it seems like twenty seven
days yes they have to go through
some extra trouble but for some
extra protection in place right
now you know if I I don't know
what what's going to happen with
your bill in here a I I
certainly would be a more open
to it with a you know no an
amendment of many that time
period down but anyway I thank
you for your answers and I thank
you for the information that you
gave us here today that's all I
have Mr chair.
Senator Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman
and thank you Senator Padilla
for bring this bill and and I'm
I just have Senator how really
impressed I am with the with the
diligence program that you guys
have an and the work that you do
and I'm really sure wants to do
all right some some I'd have
some concerns about the bill
however.
And in the concerns with the
bill on and.
When it learns kind of drop walk
through some of these
are strong this is a bill to
insert a new section of the
nursing practice that.
And and so let me start by
asking why is it that you're
doing this as a as an amendment
medicine practice at.
Change to thank you Mr chairman
and senator this would be a
change to what a practical
nurse would be authorized to do
today.
All.
And I don't understand that.
My my my question is given what
you're looking at doing in terms
of.
In terms of Hey on the.
In a treatment program though.
Are one of the lines you're
putting it that within within
the nursing practice act
deserves our is another reason
for that are located there
because it carries with it
certain applications thank you
Mr chairman Eric if you can
respond.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Ivey Soto so we we were
asking that question what what
would not when we open the file
Legislative Council services and
after just went back and forth
Legislative Council and advised
it be best for it to go into the
nurse practice because practice
nurse practitioner act because
it's it's going to be there
school to conduct this work so
now with this with all with the
statutory of it addition it
would actually reflect in the in
in pharmaceutical regulations
not up the pharmacy at the
pharmacy regulations it adds to
a farm of a pharmacist the
pharmacy tech and understand
issue practitioner may be able
to package indispensable to deal
with the with the with the
statute that allows the the
rules to actually adopt the
practice of the nurse being able
to package and seal the method
of.
Mr Chairman representative rules
are you talking about this
Martinez.
Garcia rules more pharmacy.
Right.
One of my point about the
structural problems and and so
right May let me start at this
point and I'm gonna go on to
some of the places so I was
under the impression Act made by
not looking for.
So.
The pharmacy board.
Your own selection of wall.
Just because because
administrative plans adopted
Representative the pharmacy act
on a lot of times people.
Responsible.
The second star problem that you
have.
We actually section of wall.
That that starts about the
methadone clinics.
What are the potential of the
talk about methadone clinics but
but.
For the work being eight the
promising Act we're on the we
are.
The pharmacist the pharmacy
according to see so for example
under section twenty four dash
one dash five point seven.
Insanity.
A section of that actually
authorizes.
Establishment of movie no
clinics.
One thousand seven.
And it has been the Human
Services Department performing
an assessment of the need for
clinics and develop clinical and
administrative standards as
required by federal.
To the extent that these
standards are going down as
required by federal.
Why there are Human Services
Department then if the payment
services department of the issue
in the rules as opposed to the
pharmacist our work with our
members in.
As.
That.
When you were growing to.
Our programs and services report
has I we would be.
Transaction wants.
The section remembrance messing
at once about actual dosing.
The nurse practice act.
We.
The fact that this is exactly
the kind of thing this from
done.
The nursing.
And and so it seems to me
Representative undertaking
especially as we're making
functions no statutes in this
case Representative also we we
are on.
In scenes in this section that
you have is the word the
legislation.
This is not a
that is not a defined term.
The nursing.
It is defined term.
There are some of the more
traditional acts such as
physician assistant act this
spans is eight defined term
under the osteopathic.
It is a defined term and engage
under the sea Act is not defined
term but it's not gonna define
term under the nursing.
Once again back creates yet
another a special problem.
That I think you have with
regard to the US
yes well you have them under.
Substances and Mr chairman and
senator
I believe I I I heard your your
expert witness.
Talking about the difference
between suboxone and methadone
is wondering if she could time
one one more time what is the
difference between those two.
Thank you Mr chairman Christina
you can respond to the better
question.
Thank you Mr chairman answer
Padilla so there the only
difference between methadone and
buprenorphine is these
controlled schedule type with
the DNA and under federal law
methadone is a schedule to
and.
you are feeding our boxers heavy
taxes schedule three and
Our our is that what you're
referring to are in terms of the
world just starts examples thank
you very much transaction in New
Mexico.
What.
Princesses are what we have is
and section thirty dash thirty
one dash seven revenues fraction
of controlled substances that
includes several times and in
fact under the.
Subsection a paragraph two
subparagraph and indeed
methadone appears as well as and
methadone intermediate on
appears that within the last
subsection we.
This is rose were confused as to
why you guys decide to put this
into the there's practices act.
Objection being of of section
a thirty dash thirty one dash
seven.
We're working on as provided
administrative will dispense
private practitioner with drug
abuse rehabilitation program are
in the course of the
practitioners point professional
practice that's what you're
trying to this for.
Or retained possessed by percent
percent assessed no the time
date stamps on the land grants
how it will be liberal and what
the requirements on federal so
it seems to have
There there seems to be a
discussion of exactly what
you're talking about already in
chapter thirty article thirty
one and the issue was whether or
not needs to.
Professional people are included
in the definition of
practitioner.
That is included that as well
with regard to chapter thirty
article thirty one in fact
practitioner which is to provide
a thirty thirty one dash to our
S..
The position should provide
advanced practice more practice
transition Dr Mario medicine
that is physicians assistant
practitioner clinical nurse
specialist certified nurse
midwife prescribing psychologist
morning euthanasia technician
pharmacists pharmacist regional
responses licensed or certified
to prescribe and Mr Blevins they
are subject to the controlled
substances act but that that
that there's already.
Our our framework that exists
within the statutes are asked to
it is that you're talking about
operative terms of chapter
twenty four as well as in terms
of chapter thirty that address
the issues that were that we're
dealing with but in a in a
better contacts.
What is being discussed as
opposed to simply dropping into
the nurse partners in practice
act.
Section practicing act that
we're talking about Russell I'm.
A supply of the drug.
Our would be allowed to be be
done as as I said there's
there's enormous actually talks
about that in settlement Enlund
and everything is that although
you didn't talk about someone
employed by if elected to a
treatment program approved by
the department you don't know
where to language that is
included and and and and thirty
thirty one seven of the our our
which is around in the course of
their the school.
Somebody in.
And and and you'll have the best
practices that are that the
It just keeps talking about.
Which best practices but more of
those requirements of the law
and those requirements.
Necessarily within the school.
Of this new section particularly
where you are creating it in in
statute and so and and that's
where I think wrote the concerns
of Senator doing his raised arm
that others have not commented
on nearly are comes to our
because because not most
intelligences are or were
a restrictions or even
definitions of terms would apply
based upon where this way you
read locate this particular
language Sir Senator was.
Interventions of the concerns
that I have there's a couple
other things that I can get into
but I think that's kind of you
know I've drawn off of a
committee sure thank you very
much thank you senator a senator
Morris has his hand up again I
just I don't see anyone else's
hands up so I just gonna move
the table Mr chair.
Okay will that move the table is
are indisputable so about that.
Or you know and we.
This is the basis is so
Emily can you call the roll on
Senator Moores move to table yes
is yes table now is now table.
Yes.
Yes.
All.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
For more.
Senator Stewart yes sorry.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Now.
But I am in the minority so
Senator Padilla.
What is this.
Okay.
What.
Just a table okay.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members a lot of work to do here
thank you very much for the
feedback it was very good thank
you thank you thank you senator
so chairman are you back.
I.
You're doing a fine job center
on what we go back to I checked.
Your call center twenty two
percent thirty nine do we have
yes
yes we do have greater Gonzales
but did you want to chair the
meeting now that you're back
all your should continue on
because I'm I'm reliable service
so Senate bill twenty nine
Senator okay.
Senate bill twenty two and yes
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman and with
the Senate bill twenty two will.
Of this bill Mr chairman and
members of the committee has
something brought up to.
To the legislature at least
three years the.
Hello.
Part of it was so the moon shot.
Of the total was sent to the
governor but it did not get
signed and then the other time
it run out of time so it's been
before committees so quite a few
times but what it does so of
this established with the new
motor vehicle code requirement
for the transit bus operated by
governmental mass transit agency
and six to enter traffic that
that boss has an illuminated
sign on the back of the bus
coming into traffic and was
sealed to the right away and
violation of this requirement is
determined to be a penalty
assessment Mr chair P. A. R. PAM
now penalty of a fine of twenty
five dollars small passenger
vans are not eligible to claim
this right away.
Mr chairman of I do have an
expert witness on Mr J. D. will
in turn.
If you would hope you would want
to add any more comments to it.
Right I dated Mr Billington.
On.
I see his name on the.
Mr chair representative.
Billington is on the zoom I
don't know why he's not
responding I also had Mr into
the Martillo on on the list for
your expert witnesses and I will
call okay that would be fine if
Mr Bolton's not available is
Anthony can you join us.
Yes I'm here okay great.
Actually Mr chairman and.
Yes Sir Mr Boller can you can go
first and then Anthony great
well up Senator o'neill Anthony
mortar gyro is is the expert
witness I just wanted to say a
few words and support San.
Europe.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
the Senate bill twenty two that
we're requesting your.
Currents with is essentially a
moving yield sign.
On the bus that informs
approaching motorists one of us
wants to reenter traffic from a
bus stop.
Is very straightforward bill and
the
it basically allows transit
buses demerge safely into
traffic.
Other than that I'd be glad to
stand for any questions.
Thank you and can we go to
public comment now first and do
we have anybody in opposition.
We have nobody in opposition
about someone in support.
Mr Billington is here to support
development R. J. D. did you
want to.
Alright this bill.
I did Mr chairman thank you I
just want to bring uh to the
committees that sent to ensure
we've been trying to pass this
bill not for a few years and it
did get to the legislature and
it made it up to the desk of
governor Susanna Martinez and
you may recall there was a big
pile of bills over fifty two
buildings or pocket vetoed and
this was one of them we just to
this day we don't know why this
bill was was pocket vetoed but
this is modeled after laws in
several other states I believe
we model this one after the
Colorado law and it simply
intended to prevent some of the
the the fender benders that
occur every year when somebody
bumps into Abbas wants pulling
out from a bus stop it doesn't
apply when they're pulling over
the right the doors are on the
right they're already in the
right lane it doesn't apply when
they're moving in trafficking
going left to right it only
applies when they're pulling out
from a bus stop if a lighted
yield sign is displayed on the
bus it's just like any other
yield sign and it means motor
should allow the bus to merge
into traffic thank you very much
all right okay
members of the committee I have
senator Morris.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator is is is that what it
looks like inTaos right now.
Mr Mr chairman of the the
Senator that's my backyard that
is right now this right.
You
What people Hey Mr chair
Senator the testimony said that
this was the only of the boss
was coming out from the right
what if it's coming out of you
know I'm specifically asking
about the art buses that are
coming out from the left in the
center of the the road what
about those buses.
Mr Chairman though Google to one
of my witnesses on that.
Mr Chairman this is anti more
tomorrow no implies to buses
that are in the
In a bus lane and bus stop in
there are merging want to merge
into the left lane.
I think the.
The reference to the to the
right was was not incorrect was
incorrect.
So Senator I know you don't you
don't live in Albuquerque where
the art buses killing people
left and right it's like a we
are homicide rate is higher than
the murder rate with your thank
on this just a joke.
What how's that going to affect
that is this bill really about
protecting the City of
Albuquerque from a lawsuits and
all the accidents of your bosses
crossed.
You are you might not know that
answer all Senator maybe when
your actual witnesses part.
Hello this is Anthony more
tomorrow
Sir I don't know the answer to
that we didn't to
you know basically it is it will
protect any bus
basically that is trying to
leave a bus stop in virgin to
the left lane I know the finals
vehicles behind it that it
intends to merge into you'll to
have medical so
it could be applicable to any
transit system and and it will
enhance the safety and that pre
notification to the driver
that's approaching the of us
that wants to wants to go into
the left.
Lane.
Or one that the it should yield
the right away to it.
Then I don't know how.
Operationally it would work for
you right.
K. R. again you said the left
lane but it's impact the arts
bus line in our area would be
coming out from the rights are
from the center lane so.
It just seems this is about
trying to protect Albuquerque
from lawsuits are probably happy
because of a poorly designed art
project.
I thank you all continue to
listen to the debate all right
thank you senator Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair and and
senator can you go over the
amendment that was added in.
Whatever they call themselves
now committee.
Mr chairman Senator Pirtle yes
so but the amendment does so
strictly there was a question on
the committee and referring to
will will this the buses be
merging like of the free way or
other lanes and this is to
clarify that it's strictly on
the bus stop in the other part
of the amendment was that it
does have to have an illuminated
sorry so in other words you can
have someone just put up a sign
that is not illuminated has to
be in the limited sign and
that's what the amendment us and
it was the request of the
committee.
Which it is good it's a good
amendment.
And and Mr chair and senator I I
agree on the definitely from the
designated bus stop I think that
that's a clarification that
really makes this piece of
legislation much clearer much
better but it's set subsection
B. on page eleven is is this
section does not require public
mass transit operator to
install.
Illuminated yield signs on the
buses it operates.
what is the what was the purpose
of adding illuminated their.
Instead of just having yield
science.
But it says it does not require
it.
Well All Mr chairman and senator
all hello with the amount of
money would require the has to
be illuminated.
Trying to go through and see if
someone else's says I mean it
says does not require public
mass transit operator to install
so
I believe Mr Clinton would like
to comment on that issue J. Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Pirtle what you're reading and
correct me if I'm wrong Anthony
but this is a voluntary program
this bill does not mandate that
any transit Department hast the
signs on a bus with the you're
reading says that if you decide
to put a yield sign on a bus it
simply has to be I'm eliminated
yield sign if they so choose to
put a yield sign of us thank
you.
And and Mr chair and senator can
you point me.
Mister Moore tell it would like
to speak also in reference to
your question and it yes Mister
chairman I do want to.
Rural that jadis testimony is
correct and
just just putting a a a placard
on the back of the bus doesn't
release achieve the same effect
that eliminated you'll sign
doesn't have illuminated you'll
sign is not activated until the
bus driver acts of eight acts
Act activates it so that the
vehicle behind it
can see that the they're trying
to enter in our traffic from
that designated bus stop
otherwise just just Papen
placard isn't gonna have the
same effect.
Senator Pirtle.
And and thank you Mr chairman I
I mean I guess I'm just having
trouble really understands as
does not require
seems a little.
Opposite of what we're doing
maybe I'm just reading it wrong
Mr chair but hello listen to
more the debate thank you.
No one else on the committee is
there a motion.
What will.
The committee.
Able.
So we have a a motion to table.
so the based ceases with that
the clerk so Colorado yes is
table knows don't table.
Representative Senator.
I'm all up the pass I I hadn't
been in watching so the motion
is to table this bill so we'll
come back to.
Senator Moores yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart no.
No.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Senator Duhigg.
Now.
So.
The motion passes.
Forty three all right so you
have a our cable bill
representative and
So we'll move on to the next
bill which is Senate bill thirty
nine.
Names of finalists for executive
positions Senator Thomas.
Each thank you Mr chair good
afternoon.
Members of the.
Committee
thank you for.
During this timely manner.
Senate bill thirty nine it was
identical to a bill from two
thousand nineteen I got through
the Senate floor.
With two two committees of the
house got on the.
The judge
in the house on the final day
and then I ran out of time
before the clock struck noon.
So this bill requires a
publishing at the names of at
least three final that so that
the public can learn.
The candidates who are being
seriously considered for high
level public positions such as
the superintendent of schools to
present U. N. M. and so forth
this bill is a.
Very similar to the law at least
thirty seven other states
seventy five percent of the
states have similar law New
Mexico's only five states it
gives no confidentiality to any
of the job applicants.
Many eight states the laws and
cleared the great majority of
states have adopted this
approach I'm approaching I am
proposing because experience
shows.
Angels who are currently doing a
job elsewhere well almost never
apply for a similar position if
there is no confidentiality
especially if they are happy and
successful in their current jobs
there are these are exactly the
kind of folks that we want to
attract or are challenging
public leadership positions
think about it.
Would you want your boss to know
that you were looking although
I'm looking at the list of.
Members of this particular
committee and.
Looks like everybody's either
self employed or a trust baby
so.
The week you can appreciate the
situation Senator can you keep
your remarks short we are a you
know up against time so I think
we're all familiar with the bill
okay.
So what.
Anyway.
Okay I'm legislative bill
ultimately.
Well as I said the bill got
through it all the way to the
house and the last thing you.
It died because they are.
the critics claim there's no
evidence.
For this approach yet search
after search in New Mexico
institutions have been unable to
attract any candidates who are
serving as chief executives are
comparable situation in a
recent.
Search for police chief
Albuquerque you'll remember that
there was only one maybe two.
From a big city and the one of
them was a.
Nobody was serving as a top
police chief in a in a large
city and APS Senator would you
please just cut it short who are
your experts we get it.
Okay I'm sorry well you know I
you know you some of your
languages rather offensive so go
ahead.
You might.
Anyway what time but go ahead
and do need to make get you
upset sorry.
So I have three three expert
witnesses you want to hear all
of them are not often or want to
keep in mind the time per year I
mean bring him on and we have
public comment.
Okay this real quick.
To Google concluding sentences
this bill is endorsed by.
Eleven or twelve organizations
and municipal league the.
The New Mexico counties
association New Mexico school
board association a coalition of
education leaders council of
university presidents APS U. N.
M. U. M. S. U. and the city of a
Rio Rancho finally Mr.
Mr chair I hope this is who we
would not be the last state to
add this best practices
provision to our inspection of
public records act seven three.
Three witnesses AJ forte from
New Mexico eight Nick Estes a
former general counsel for UNM
and lonely maybe parties who is
a lobbyist for the school board
association.
We will start off.
With AJ four eight.
Forte from the and that's what
we thank you Mr.
Mr chair thank you.
Mr chair representative is not
in the waiting room of the June
I have one and the other two
expert witnesses who would you
like to go next senator.
We'll take the only may Ortiz.
This is Laurie may in the in the
Senator can you hear me yes
thank you Senator thank you for
allowing me to join you all I am
million more tease the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
The New Mexico school board
association maintains a
membership of eighty nine school
districts throughout the state
of New Mexico Mr chairman and
members of the committee we
appreciate the time to speak to
you as you probably know one of
the major responsibilities of
school board members is that
extremely critical activity is
top of hiring a superintendent
every school board strives to
provide the best qualified
individual for the most
important leadership job in
their local community we have
heard many actual accounts and
narratives of school districts
being limited in their super
intendant candidate pools
because the tent applicant's
feared their names would be
publicized immediately upon
throwing their hats in the ring.
Many potential candidates and
applicants were interested in
applying so that they could be
vetted through the first round
of interviews to determine if
the fit could possibly be good
for both of them in the school
district's many individuals that
we're probably superintendents
another local districts are
moving up the ranks to a
superintendent position
unfortunately some potential
applicants held back in the
state getting that fits very
that their actions would
negatively affect their current
job environment and Mr Chairman
as a former school board member
for twelve years I and president
at my school board of Pojoaque
at
thirteen years ago I sat and
shared the hiring of two
different superintendents trying
to during two different times
and I have on both locations
individuals tell me from other
districts we cannot put our hat
in the ring our our our board
members will know right away but
we would like to see there's a
good fit so I have first hand
experience and that this this
occurs and I was my district was
subject to two different times.
Senate bill thirty nine exempt
applicants from the public
record inspection prior to being
selected as finalists and we
believe what facilitates school
districts having a larger pool
of candidates New Mexico school
board association point supports
the exemption from the public
record exact to allow boards to
release only the final three
candidates for superintendent
positions we extremely thank the
sponsor for his continued
support and his persistence and
bringing this legislation
forward and helping us move it
to a positive conclusion we ask
this committee's favorable
consideration and we thank you
for the time of to allow to
speak to you thank you.
common your next expert.
Thank you Mr chairman expects
for his neck yes this for more
on.
General counsel for University
of New Mexico thank you thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak I'm here strictly as
a citizen a retired citizen of
am something of an expert in
this area because of my prior
service at UNM but I got
individually interested in it I
potentially a few years ago do
did a survey of all the public
records law all the states with
the with looking at this issue
of confidentiality and hiring
and I was really amazed that of
New Mexico was one of only five
states that has no
confidentiality at all for
hiring with one exception that I
know of that's presidents of
universities other than that
it's all names can be disclosed
if anybody asks and the problem
with that it's really this bill
is actually very focused in its
intent the problem with that is
not that you can't get any good
candidates to apply or any
qualified candidates to apply
that that's not true you know a
lot of our agencies have very
good people of serving but you
can't get are people who are
doing the same job somewhere
else so ms Ortiz referred to
over school superintendents who
might want to move from one
place to another and they just
and they're the ones who are
really they are among the ones
who were very well qualified
they're not the only good
candidates but people who are
obviously already doing the same
job are especially qualified to
step into a very difficult
leadership role somewhere else
and those folks simply
to experience all over the
country shows that they simply
will not apply you can wish that
they would apply or scold them
for not applaud but they just
won't people who are in a number
two position of may very well
people respect ambition but
someone from one place is not
going to move hardly ever be
willing when they don't even
know whether they'll be a
finalist or not and those are
some of the.
People who are best qualified
and have shown that they can do
a really difficult job in the
public sector with all the
challenges that these jobs have
got I'd like to respond also to
some of the things that the
opponents have said just a
couple it this there's no reason
to think that adoption of this
bill which is very similar to
what they do in many many other
states no reason to think that
it would lead to cronyism in
these backroom deals and that's
because we have to come up with
the entities have to come up
with the names of finalists ten
days in advance and if a
finalist one of those three or
they could be three or four or
five but they have to have at
least three and if one of them
is obviously not qualified and
if the local newspapers finds
out that it's the brother of
somebody on the school board I
mean that will come out the
cause of this advance warning
and that's why this is a
reasonable compromise so there's
really cronyism is not of fear
and I don't think.
This charge that it might lead
to discrimination is a serious
concern either I mean it's
really saying that the members
these elected members of our
boards and commissions and
councils are going to start
jumping to discriminate against
women or minorities I their
elected just like you guys and I
just I don't see that happening
certainly there is nothing to
prevent an individual who feels
that he or she is more qualified
and got passed over that person
can certainly go public and say
so and explain why or the person
can you can file a lawsuit
nothing is more can you wrap it
up here.
That essentially is the wrap up
of I think this will do a lot of
public policy involves trade
offs and the the the lost we've
got here is not getting
experienced people into the pool
for these positions thanks thank
you.
Senator did you have another
expert so we got a public
comment.
You go to public comment great
and so can't do we start with
opposition and those speaking
keep in mind you've got ten
minutes total so keep it within
two I delay will cut you off so
we'll go opposite opposition
first.
Mr chair for sure have Melanie
nature's.
Thank you I am no majors I hope
I just a second.
I am the executive director of
the New Mexico foundation.
For open government and I've
come to you today on behalf of
thousands of New Mexicans who
value accountability and
transparency to oppose this
legislation I have to question
the logic behind this bill and
ask myself along with the
question questions I hope you're
asking two questions like what
is this bill want to make the
hiring process for some of the
most important offices in New
Mexico much more secretive about
rock part of democracy is that
citizens have the right to know
how their government is being
run are perhaps what evidence
there to show the closing off
the process result in a better
applicant pool the sponsors
haven't provided any studies I
supplied you with evidence
showing just the opposite our
municipalities police
departments to school districts
now being headed up by a
qualified capable executives
what if an agency announces
finalists are all white males
and when the public X. asserts
that these were the best
qualified applicants.
Public be able to test that
assertion how do we ensure under
race age or other factor equity
in hiring if there is limited
transparency is a few of the
questions I have as to what this
is a very bad step for New
Mexico secrecy is not necessary
to get excellent candidates it's
poor public policy to hide the
names of people who seek to lead
our public universities.
Showing their multi million
dollar budget head up our cities
and other offices these are the
decisions that affect the lives
of people and community.
We ask ourselves of the
candidate has a problem with New
Mexico's open government laws
perhaps he or she is not a good
fit their emails calendars and
travel records will be subject
to public scrutiny shouldn't we
let cultural them culturally
embrace our robust sunshine laws
from the start senators by email
I shared with you the story of
one Jose Pena.
Majors we we have a two minute
let our interpreter with the
leverage a riveting history
lesson about six.
With me excuse me we have two
minutes we got the email so can
you please wrap it up.
Okay.
All right the next next the.
Yes I'm asking you to stay
within two minutes.
Which I thought it we made very
clear.
Your points are well taken we
got the emails so can you please
wrap it up.
Mr chair next to have Mr
standing Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is sandy Lopez I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico press
association Representative
thirty eight weekly and daily
newspapers with a readership of
seven hundred seventy six
thousand readers mandated
Mexican grown up on a farm in
harassment publisher most of my
career
I'm.
Here today to ask the committee
to vote no to this bill for
secret government Senate bill
thirty nine is a vote is a vote
for the for this bill is a vote
against democracy.
You've heard
that Mr Thomas say that this is
this is a a compromise but I'm
here to tell you this the bill
for secret government in New
Mexico newspapers have not
agreed to this bill.
you've heard that one of eight
states that require open
searches.
Well you know other states they
may not cherished democracy like
New Mexico to.
You may also hear the low number
of applicants from the police
Albuquerque police department
but you know there was a
deputy commissioner.
Role of operation of the
Philadelphia police department
was a finalist and looks like a
pretty pretty good resume to me
the city did the search right C.
belkhir do they are they this
the worst the state of public
input during the chief of police
search and received nearly
twenty three hundred responses
an online survey hosting more
than forty community input
sessions over two months the
search resulted in almost forty
applicants for the position.
Okay.
I mean we're we're two minutes
two minutes okay so again I'm
asking the committee to vote no
on Senate bill thirty nine is a
bill for secret government
against democracy and should not
continue thank you yes thank
you.
Stop.
I'm.
Mr Bryan gentle.
Did you hear me yes.
Mr chairman members the
committee my name is Brian
channel I'm with Albuquerque
publishing company in
Albuquerque journal this is at
least the third or fourth sixty
day session where this bill has
come up Mr Esteves and I have
both testified at time and
testified about it time and time
again
It is that purpose.
Allegedly is to get more people
to apply for jobs in New Mexico
I live in New Mexico I choose to
live in New Mexico I'm glad I
live in New Mexico and I don't
want to sound negative but maybe
it is the jobs being offered
that are attracting the
applicants that universities or
other bodies think they should
offer two years ago it was a
former governor Carruthers state
testified that they were able to
attract quality coaches this
time it school superintendents
that the target of those we
can't get seems to keep changing
but the basic premise of this
bill chips away at April and and
if this is adopted and doesn't
improve the situation that we
hear so much testimony against
there's no way to go back and
put it back once we've chipped
indoor approve bill and in New
Mexico should be proud of where
they stand on April the damages
done and so on behalf of the
journal in Albuquerque
publishing company we stand in
opposition thank you thank you
Brian thank you next up in
opposition.
We help our opposition but we do
have one person in support of
the bill okay great so just
bring that person on.
All right I will be Mr
Koppelman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Steve
Kopelman I worked for New Mexico
counties are executive committee
has voted to support the bill we
appreciate senator Tom bring
this forward we think it's
important on these high level
positions don't believe that it
really negatively will affect
transparency but I think it will
certainly help getting a strong
pool of applicants and we
support the bill thank you thank
you Steve and now I to the
committee we go I'm anybody on
the committee that wishes to
speak on this bill.
Senator Ivey Soto you're the
first one I saw.
Okay relaunch Mr Chairman I just
have a couple of.
All questions.
Our regarding the bill.
Itself so as I look at the bill.
I I notice that you are not
suggesting aware of this is to
be compiled this is a pretty new
material to be enacted by the
legislature we are we are do you
see this.
Is being compiled within within
the statute program work of New
Mexico because that actually
does make a big difference.
Thank you.
Senator for your question
And nobody ever asked me that
before I really talk to them
thought about if you have any
suggestions.
And we can amount to.
Lawrence I mean it's this is you
know something going forward so
that's a sort of wanting
renter's insurance your your
your thinking might and I'll.
The Dow went also on what the
scope of what you anticipate
from much.
Whether you know where it might
go that's fine.
It's our office so with regard
to subsection B..
I think that that there are
fewer than three applicants or
candidates.
What part of executive position.
The considered all finalists.
But but is there are there are
few things that often come
before somebody's on part of
consideration.
And so I think I think.
Well I understand the scope of
what you're trying to DO not
shoot you really actually get
they are in terms of the names
of the people.
What we're actually going to be
R. A. N. at a position to go
before the public body
consideration.
I'm I'm I'm clearer as to why
subsection C. exists in the.
In the
Would you please explain why
subsection C. exists in the
bill.
Section E. as in Edward E. C.
Charlie letters of reference for
medical.
Well that's pretty a.
Standard.
Are you you think it's cover
someplace ulcers Jareth
wondering why it's in there.
On.
Because among other things.
right so you got subsection.
I
think that that that says this
section may be enforced parts of
the provisions of inspection
public records act so currently
I'm showing for the first public
records act enforced pursuant to
the provisions of the special
Representative we'll talk about
that in just a second.
We can see.
That
in his first public records act
members of the for instance
unemployment is already exempt
from the inspection public
records act so then my question
is why are you exerting a second
time.
And it seems to me that medical
evaluations will be covered by
by HICKERNELL right
I do not one that's exempt
Department of Health another one
that's exempted already under
employment.
And then you send on that it's
great that that it should be
enforced under improper but
where they enforcing the
exemptions from improper them
forcing exemption from this
bill.
What will.
You are would you like to delete
section C..
Our little ones and.
It's probably redundant.
Okay.
This is so interesting to
subsection D. which is that this
action may be enforced pursuant
to provisions of public records
act of this section of our
exempting people from inspection
for the from the inspection
public records act of force
meant ones that are that anybody
could do.
One of his first public records
act.
What's the fact that people are
exempted information's exempt
and that's not discoverable
under inspection public records
act could you explain that to
me.
I can't explain what went.
Senator.
By Senator Padilla expert
witness.
This go ahead Nick.
Mr chair Senators I would say
that.
The section is properly in there
because if they in to do went
ahead and hired someone and
refused to reveal the inferred
that you know the resumes of the
three finalists the end of that
entity could be sued I think or
you know the Attorney General
could intervene and say you
violated this new provision of
it brought and you must make
those records available before
you can go ahead and hire
somebody that's that's my
understanding that was that well
I'll leave it at that.
I'm I'm as confident section is
about.
Exemptions from special public
records not.
Workers some women confusion is.
Our no.
In terms of us here chaired
Senator I I think there's an
affirmative duty here to
disclose these three names it's
qualified because you don't have
to X. disclose any others would
you do have to disclose at least
these three and if somebody said
no we're going to ignore that we
like you know it's Joe over here
we're gonna just hiring.
Of and and the Albuquerque
journal or whomever said well
Hey wait a what about these
the requirement to have three
finalists and they just ignore
it I think it it's that's that's
a failure to disclose which is
appropriate for enforcement
under IPRA.
Some are.
With general.
Explain to me what song notice
under definitions you have the
definition of point of contact
of the session.
Right Representative says our
needs are not elected chief
executive officer of a state
agency.
Or institution or political
subdivision of the state's.
But not a requirement including
a cabinet secretary.
Sorry.
When we also provide
superintendents makes a
decision.
I just.
Is that not correct.
Yes yes senator
and Mr chairman and and so
common and and so when this
order.
What.
With somebody I mean that's our.
I would also visit my house.
Yes I would certainly concede
that the bill is limited to
appointive officers obviously to
exclude people who are elected
like yourselves
right I understand that because
because because when your vote
and you.
You are already nervous is
running at about eight generous
who won and and certainly if
you're also in my nose that
program long time I've been
there yes
thank you for bringing me back
to that memory but mmhm but my
question is you said does not
include a political appointment.
If you have.
Department.
I'm gonna executive officer
isn't that a political
appointments and insert.
You not to provide more
political appointment it seems
to me that you are providing
their.
Exception that swallows the rule
from the outset.
Well Mister chairman senator I
think the whole the whole
context.
Is it is clear enough to meet
that and perhaps it's not to you
but it is to me we I want we
hooping drafting this and
working with the.
Legislative Council Service we
tried to make it clear that it
would not apply to cabinet
secretaries primarily people who
are traditionally of picked by
the governor of it without doing
any kind of formal search I I
think this the the bill is
intended to apply to people who
were picked with the with the
search for anyone can apply and
then you go through the process
of screening and ultimately come
up with several finalists that's
that's what this is intended to
apply to an to my mind that's
reasonably clear or I one could
always make something more
precise and high I respect that
of this is the best we could do
to try to cover the field that
we're trying to cover of.
And exempt something we're
trying to exempt but without
excessive verbiage.
But are you sure point I think
technically Senator your point
is probably correct it in some
sense anything anybody appointed
you know that these bodies are
political body this is that
democracy in their elected and
and but I think the whole
context of that provision and
the and the whole statute or
amendment that we're proposing.
I think makes it reasonably
clear what we're talking about
here city managers and so forth
that are hired with the cert
with advertising in a search.
Okay so I'm and finally are you
so choose that.
The appointed.
Chief executive officer I'm a
state agency.
So
how state agency in this
context.
We don't know what is going to
be in the statutes but it's
going to get compiled no one
told us that.
What is the state agency in this
context.
It's Mr chair Senator
The state agency is I think used
in many many statutes and is a
sort of term of art in the
entire NMSA of I I get U. N. M.
I. we used to have to think
about ourselves and we were a
state educational institution of
other places like the highway
department or folks like that
are are agencies it's agency is
obviously a very broad term
But I I don't find that it is
specially when you consider when
you also include political
subdivisions I think that pretty
much covers the whole water for
official state or local bodies
in New Mexico I personally don't
find that to be ambiguous.
Okay here's the thing right and
this is where the definition
matters for example under public
finances under chapter CENIC's
sentencing means any departments
institutions Broward the.
The mission district committee
of government of the state of
New Mexico.
However under chapter entities
are professionals.
The certainly different meeting.
On our on chapter ten public
officers employees state agency
means the state or any of its
branches.
Our engines Department boards as
from town is institutions.
There are quite the same.
Under chapter opened and in the
middle of equipment and the
thorniest agency is an agency
departments office of the state
of New Mexico this cabinet
level.
It's for all slightly different.
The state agency.
So I'm.
With a very different.
Definitions that we heart of
engine C. what what what eight
point in this is that is that if
if we don't win this government
statutes we don't remember
definitions apply there there
are many different definitions
and to apply the same term it is
actually in work this time in
that regard it doesn't make
clear for example are you saying
that the governor of the state
of New Mexico.
I would be able to top three
finalists for the fish and game
commission.
We have a state insurance
includes compression.
That will M. if it's not if the
governor is making that
appointment that's an
appointment that would be
subject to this and I thought
that would probably get into
executive privilege.
I'm on the other hand
well you know we also have for
example.
Your.
I was the director of the
viewmodel chips at the secretary
of state's office.
This would also suggest
depending on your definition of
HSD order records forms
beautiful secretary of state
would have to regain the
finalists that doesn't include
euro should not have to.
Requirements but the thing is.
Maybe it's because we're not
really sure what that means in
the context of this particular
bill.
The service you are bringing
actually I'm I'm somewhat
sympathetic to the concern that
you're bringing however this
particular bill I think
is is not properly for
infrastructure in order to get
you to register trying to go
thank you very much Mr thank you
senator Morris Europe.
Thank you Mr I make a motion for
tabling.
Okay we have tabling motion so
this is one discussion ends and
the
and Emily will call the roll on
the tabling motion yes cable
knows to not table.
Senator Baca.
Senator Duhigg.
Hello yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez.
No.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator about this yes.
Your bills tabled so I thank you
for your presentation more.
Is never came on during the
voting.
She wondered whether or not.
How did you want to vote.
Cheerful okay.
Okay.
Government okay all right so I'm
next up we have we have time for
the favor of bill of the
session.
Senator Pirtle Senate bill one
oh to daylight savings time.
The only what's that we got an
extra hour now.
Right.
It's only twenty two it's only
three twenty two Mr chair so we
we have time we have time
Senator you can assume that just
about everyone I think everyone
on your nose this bill extremely
well so please proceed.
Mr Chairman.
And I and I have Scott Yates
here third there are some
technical questions he's here
will will make sure the
committee doesn't need to have
any extra
testimony that we don't need I
know Senator Duhigg is I believe
the only one that has not seen
this bill essentially what this
will do is when the federal
government passes a law allowing
states to go to full time
daylight saving New Mexico would
join there's currently fifteen
other states that have done this
we would be state number sixteen
we were the first state to ever
get this passed through one
chamber but unfortunately
fifteen other states have got in
front of us and actually pass
the legislation so we would be
number sixteen there are two
bills moving through the federal
The legislative process now and
one is to have us on permanent
daylight saving time year round
so I think this will definitely
send the masters that they
either need to do what we're
proposing here or the whole
country go to permit the life
saving time we spent eight
months on summer time all and
and so I'm just propose we do
summer time all the time X.
share at the end of the day to
spend with family thank you Mr
right thank you and so your
experts here to answer any
questions do we have anybody
want to weigh in on this or can
we go straight to the committee.
Sure we have one person for
public comment it's just you
Google and I just let him into
the zoo great Steve join us.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Steve
Coleman again and our board of
directors support system we
think our time is come.
As the chambers brothers used to
staying.
Okay thank you Senator Pirtle.
The counties we appreciate what
he does all right okay so to the
committee we go who's up first.
Do passive Kathy do that doesn't
have a question.
Sure.
German so yes I know you have.
I would like to be added to the
speaker's voice okay let's go
with our let's go with that okay
let's go with our chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members are you all know I
oppose this pretty consistently
over the years principally
because of the nature and the
relationship between southern
New Mexico Dona ana county el
Paso and what is from where
there's a great deal of of
business traffic commerce
between our our cities and our
shared border of having a
different time zone at some time
in the year and then having the
same times on other parts the
year between Los crucis el Paso
sharing the same airport rail
lines Commerce doctors
appointments hospitals all of
those things I think would wreak
havoc on our local economy to
have a just having a gas when we
make appointments or schedule
banks that sometime of the year
would be on the same time as a
Paso and other times would be on
different time so I I have to
oppose the bill Mr chairman and
urged committee members not to
support this for that reason.
Thank you chairman I Senator
Pirtle did you have a response
to that time zone issue or did
you want to just go to the
committee.
And Mr chair for for the second
time I think we can we can
probably go to the committee
unless you know in any to
explain a little bit more you
know we we see this in other
parts of the state I know
senator Munoz has testified that
in his neck of the woods where
zona is with us for months of
the year and not eight months
out of the year that you know
they seem to make it work where
he's at and where he's from so I
think yes it will take a little
bit of time to get used to this
but we're we're creatures were
intelligent creatures and with
cell phones and things we can
figure out what time it is and
and what what time are doctors
appointment will be thank you Mr
chair Mister Yates wants to
speak your.
You're a for us.
Keep it brief Mr chair and and
yes you've got one yesterday
it's one minute.
If we're counting right now I I
I won't even take over the I
want to educate in general I
just want to speak to the
particular point from Senator
Sanchez thank you Mr to get
fifty seconds.
I think there's almost no chance
that the there would be a
basically like in the clock for
New Mexico and not for Texas at
the same time basically what
this bill would do is send a big
message to Washington DC that
Mexico wants to be counted the
state that watch the clock
doesn't change twice a year and
the most probably what would
happen is that they would hear
that in passed national
legislation to lock the clock
for the whole country because
their concern is of uniform you
know there's lots of prostate
commerce concerns around the
country and then I can want to
do that but they are gonna want
to fix the clock changing so
this would be a way to signal
that Washington should actually
give stuff up and fix this thank
you are thank you thank you so
to the committee we go senator
Morris did you want to do our
our state the two passed motion
is there a second on that two
passed.
All second second.
That motion so we have a due
pass motion on this bill that
you know yes is yes and no is a
no the Emily you'll call the
roll.
Baca.
Yes sorry.
Okay we have Baca is a test
Senator.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez no.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator do.
This no.
Okay all right well
congratulations Senator pearl
and with that there is without
that finishes our agenda for the
day rate and for twenty six so
so thanks everyone and the good
meeting and and we'll be in
touch I'm sure am I will keep us
posted on everything so I would.
