just so that the the directions
Task Force stated within the
with taking into account the the
the limitations contained in
federal law what they do is.
So yes factors.
Discussion.
So Mister chair just what
strikes me reading this is kind
of another policy of this
committee is we don't put it.
We don't say things that are
already true like the fact that
federal law is always gonna.
Preamps.
Probably and so I'm not sure.
I'm not sure what this language
ads other than Frank face to
make it harder for them to argue
in court against federal
preemption I don't think it.
I think this if this is true
this is true when we put it in
the mail and.
In the movie.
On the proposed amendment passed
out many other questions
comments and one of.
Of doing the average discuss
Senator Ivey Soto joins Senator
two X..
Alice's.
To that amendment says the task
force was combined for all of us
to be sent to cellphones.
And so I don't see the
necessity.
But anyway I understand that
center I was sort of spring and
part of this for the last two or
three years in generations of
this bill is I appreciate him
trying to keep us consisted of
the same time a point of telling
Center working particularly I
get better every year I hope
also.
We've grown familiar we do so
and that that's all
Senator Pirtle Newman thank you
Mr chair you have you make a
great point but what about the
when the state legalize cannabis
I mean it.
The federal law.
Kansas state sometimes can do.
I mean they've done what they've
they've wanted with with no
backlash is that something that
this would help to address that
you would have something along
those lines.
Your question me I don't know
when we do that.
And really you know sort of
personal growth in the guy who
did not support the bill so for
us to justify under federal law
would be part of the reason I
thought online for us to do so
but what you don't want to
answer your question the federal
government's turning a blind
dollars when they're actually
doing
I kind of don't ask don't tell
policy when it comes to
marijuana thank as well with the
on the subject.
Amendment to so do we ask you
Senators time we did not so
center somewhere on the medical
Mr chair respectfully I I agree
with the committee I think it
restates what is already common
sense I mean that course we're
not going to be doing violate
law federal law knowingly so I
think it's unnecessary and
potentially unhelpful.
Any other questions comments
let's just do this on a roll
call please only.
The amendment which you have in
writing is sixty six point one
please.
Yes.
Center I'm so yes ma'am Senator
Moores yes.
Federal yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart hello.
There were no.
No.
Senator months no that amendment
is enough to provide for Senator
Ivey Soto you so for.
Thank you Mr you know I'd I want
to really appreciate the immense
amount of work that the response
to this bill is put in over the
years
can I have have have talked a
few times that that that he came
across this as as chair of.
We do act and as this materials
interim committee
that was actually a slot that
will put was offered to me and
and I and I to me or to and and
senator Steinborn ended up
in the
Has this a hot seat maybe the
glowing State the for that and
you know but but it's it's this
is something where you know the
it's it's very complex stuff.
Those of us who have had
conversations with Senator
Steinborn I think.
All of us have have
had conversations with Senator
Steinborn over the last few days
about this is that he's.
he's.
Educated of self on all these
things and and you know we
result people could disagree on
some things I do think this is a
a preemptive area.
And and it is
I support this bill in the end.
But you know look the the
federal government's got a real
problem.
And safest in closest really is
the.
Would be the best policy of the
federal government
if you create it you store it.
and
that doesn't work for all of the
facilities but that would work
for a number of facilities.
And at least for for for
temporary storage.
And you know
they got to figure this out they
got to figure this out and and
part of the dilemma with this
bill is it's got to be put
someplace.
Everybody's happy to say yeah
it's got to be put someplace
just not here.
And you know I I recognize that
You know we have.
This is this is a nationwide
problem that has been on our
doorstep in the state.
and.
And frankly if the get out.
Thinks that the that the
That the issue of a preemption
comes into play.
That will that will that will
determine the direction we go to
the to the stress of that
preemption there's a a balance
between the two I think I think
that will determine a different
path.
and just how we go and
But I do you know this is.
Kelly this is a difficult
decision.
Because of the competing
interests and because of the.
The legal issues that even for
those of us who do this for a
living are not crystal clear
necessarily.
and even though I think most of
us tend to lean towards it's
probably preemptive.
But but anyways thank you thank
you for what you've done on this
is that and your your your
continuing efforts on this in
this area and
You know like I said I as as
amended
This point.
Is there more thank you Mr thank
you senator and I'm not sure
what those are the sort of some
of the comments were almost to
the to use those you know right
now though you know much my
grandfather works the Moss
almost started at two forty two
person security in a
construction and unified
relatively of elderly but over
time numbers we're answer that
we treated to the exposure that
would have had to so it's it's
one of this is one of those
issues Senator Ivy Soto product
you know they want to build that
we don't want in our backyard to
the auto if this was being this
proposed in our.
Senator Ivey Soto center
students and on the office.
Do it on the rest of us would be
to have the very stronger
different conversations that we
are what strikes me those people
the county want this for for
their own reasons
so this one of those situations
we have to evaluate to look at
it and I grew that are for
personal conversations and
Steinborn about the this and I
have some personal history with
the nuclear industry with my
family in New Mexico and some of
the damage it's done it quite
frankly federal government stuff
and that this conversation for
the federal government's the
work steward of the environment
in New Mexico bye bye are not
they are horrible environmental
stewards in New Mexico from the
uranium to Superfund sites so we
always talk about it was Senator
Steinborn are why we want to
give them more power to more
land over federal government
about such a horrible job with
oil spills in Albuquerque with
uranium with all the other
things that they've done
to overflow.
You know the the the the
terrible stewards of our of our
Mexico.
But does resonate to me that the
county wants it and the county
is quite frankly two on the two
miles from my district
so I.
I'm not sure exactly Mr chairman
of the next ten seconds I guess
go to make up my mind but I
definitely understand what you
guys are doing and what you're
doing and I'll trust the federal
government for the active role
and so I appreciate what you're
what you're trying to do about
senator thank you and it's any
kind.
It's out of order CENIC and
that's right on the border I
believe correct wrong so thanks
we're right on the border of any
of these and.
It's only count but it will
travel through Bernalillo county
so.
Any of this.
The slides.
Thank you.
The committee's members
questions comments once in
about.
Thank you Mr chair I guess of
the part that comes we Mr chair
and I I the center of.
This.
We have attorneys on this
committee and feel like I just
heard to say that as preemption
issues I personally feel like it
has production issues in FIR
goes on to talk about these
issues and it states in their
that is costly and time
consuming litigation if the bill
were were challenged under New
Mexico law and the constitution
and and in there it goes on and
the part that really bothers me
is is K. one similar to it was
has already been litigated and
it was actually for the tenth
circuit this this lawless to to
have preemption issues and so I
think that.
How much is the sentiment is
there invited me with cannabis
Mr chair Senator to law that we
that we know why it's federal
law we have a good indication
that it does this body decided
to do that with Candace I I like
the good senator to not support
capitalized there
And this is the same thing I
just think that would only go
down this route.
we are saying yes we know this
is going to be costly and time
consuming litigation I think it
has a low probability of success
for us so we're saying let's
spend all this money all this
taxpayer money fighting it even
though we.
Source in court.
I just think that's
irresponsible in the way to
to pass bills and turn them into
into law essentially with that
sort of of four hand knowledge
and so that that's that's my
real issue with the you know on
that the ability to clear waste
Mr chair Senator and in New
Mexico I'm not real fond of the
idea but you know what I'm
looking at this from a local
perspective that I've always
thought of and then from this
legal perspective and you know I
I would think that you know.
In an attorney in the other
attorneys on this committee that
you know I I would hope that we
would side on the on the
judicial economy part of the
story.
Senator anyone else.
So this is a challenging issue
just another perspective it
creates a tension between local
interests and statewide
interests of me and and I want
to respect to the many elected
officials the mayors city
councilors county commissioners
from the local area very
supportive John you and others a
lot of work to organize
yourselves into this and for
this and I understand I think we
also for job creation and the
opportunity for you all to bring
yourself up at the local level
doing respect for that versus
the recognition that this this
this plan will involve the state
as a whole to the extent that
its transportation of
potentially dangerous material
from all state and and the
consequences of listening I
can't help but use the moment to
remember the Ryan well where
what would be a local problem
became an issue for all of us to
to address environmental
unintended consequence so and
it's at the local level.
And so so we have to be
cognizant of the the balance
between the local objectives
goals desires and the statewide
implications I I share with I
think sounds like most of the
colleagues I respect was
committed right deal with the
thing that this probably
preempted but my opinion doesn't
matter
it this level not a judge of the
federal judge of federal judge
will decide it we've been we've
been taking this position that
this printer for three four
years I think that is come back
to us we have a persuaded the
advocates that this is preempted
so let me let a federal judge
decide this issue once and for
all and senior center Baca
appreciate your point is gonna
be costly and time consuming and
it's kind of maybe not be the
ideal way to resolve an issue
but I don't I don't think that
we've been able in this
committee and legislature to
convince the proponents that
this preemptive and and I think
there's maybe some doubt even
from the pre recorded lines the
rural the district the federal
government occupies areas and
areas of I have no doubt that a
federal judge will we'll see
this bill soon and decide the
issue and then maybe we'll get
yield up to the tenth circuit
and then maybe the US Supreme
Court to look at it and given my
reading of the U. S. supreme
court these days I I have a
pretty good feeling for this
will all New Hope community but
we'll see we'll see maybe in our
lifetime so in a minute the the
only thing other thing I would
add is a center I hope that you
will will respect the work of
this committee in the amendments
that have been made the oldest
trick in the book to put
amendments on a bill willingly
to get it through the committee
and get a vote then try and have
those removed at a later stage
on the floor there's nothing
that we can do as members to
change that the right of every
member to go in there and do
that but I will tell you that
you have my support on this bill
simply because we've agreed to
that amendment I think that
Madam speaker.
I was but I think that's
probably true of a lot of us
we're trying to a full reading
is good drafting law making good
writing and and the to to strip
not amendments after the the
committee for some other purpose
All I can tell you this will
will not sit well with me in the
future and I hope that that's
not that's not your intention
today as well.
I respect this committee process
what I would some bills here and
the I think we have some very
fine very crispy where's
handlers I numbers are storage
is been on house and Senate
judiciary committee's long
enough long enough right so yeah
so and and that's true for
Centers more central's well to
some on a two thousand would be
passed motion as amended we do
not yes
have centers are doing.
It has.
Do Raul please.
Senator about no.
Senator right so the is that
Senator Moores this is one or
both.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes Senator two
Senator yes.
Right put eight to one you have
a do pass motion to explain his
folks are Moores thank you Mr
the center and you set of
bipartisan yes and I just want
to go with some offices are
four and bipartisan manner with
those of them so I will be do
our what centers office saying
that the you are
is it would I would of course
our differently if without those
numbers thank you Mr thank you
Sir Mr chairman then be allowed
to make one percent.
Just because it's really
impactful issues being fall
number one colleagues there is
Supreme Court case decision that
ruled that California law
prohibiting the new generation
of spent fuel was not preempted
so number one it's important to
look at the case law is we don't
know number number eighty nine
no Miss Mister Mister
this is simple this is important
and I'll shut up in in Utah they
did pass a law in that facility
was never built there is a value
to standing up there's an
opportunity if we pass this law
for the company to say we don't
want to be we don't impose on
the state that really doesn't
want this and that's what I'm
hoping will be the outcome here
and there will be no litigation
thank you for your question.
This gentleman a lot of the
Sanchez post both comments and
native Americans.
Thank you to.
Senate bill twenty one some of
rigs I saw you.
Prescribed burning in the spring
for those of you to join us a
little bit late my goal is to
work until six o'clock.
Four and a half five hours the
this
Members of the just a quick what
we have an interlude have mostly
here.
A Centers I hope you have left
your schedules free for tomorrow
using just a reminder for
everyone so we should have the
details information not the C.
Emily we need to focus on the
side.
Hi.
Our species from.
Have some.
Consider this.
I just want to.
I.
That might note I'd still the
marks the peak so yes.
One
second.
Creature Representative.
Right.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Most of you know kind of the
history of this bill
it was introduced in had a
committee substitute drafted to
in state conservation the the
opponents initially that were
part of the discussion debate
the Committee substitute all at
that point in time agreed to the
changes in the committee
substance I'm here in a little
bit right now that that that may
have changed after the second
hearing in conservation so we'll
see how that comes out if a debt
of.
Mr chair and committee members
last year New Mexico was ravaged
by wildfire the hermits peak
calf canyon fire became the
largest fire ever in the history
of the state of New Mexico it
was a result of a prescribed
burn that got out of control.
Homes were lost and property was
destroyed.
Hundreds of people and actually
thousands of people had to
evacuate not knowing what was to
become of their most valued
asset their home.
Senate bill twenty one offers
one more layer of protection for
those.
Menino prescriber.
And for those who might suffer
should that burn get out of
control under this bill
prescribers may not be conducted
in the months of March April and
may when a red flag warning has
been issued by the National
Weather Service for that date in
that location.
Current law defines exactly were
prescribed burn is And identify
certain agricultural exceptions
do you just for service in the
state for sure are currently
working on improving procedures
involving these types of work.
But for those caught up in last
year's fire.
It's too little and it's too
late.
But actually even with the
procedural changes that will be
that will be made there's no
guarantee that this type of fire
won't happen again.
And who's to say that the next
time I will destroy age of fire.
Cloudcroft to show shady for
Cuba or even one of our larger
communities like Las Vegas or
San.
In addition the eastern plains
are not exempt from fire.
This past summer I listen to
people from Las Vegas more and
the surrounding area described
what happened to them.
Truly the fire was only the
beginning to the challenges they
face down and they continue to
face now.
Senate bill twenty one gives the
legislature chance to weigh in
and let those people know and
let the people of New Mexico now
that we stand with them.
This bill does not ban
prescribed burns it is not even
banned them in the spring.
It does add the additional
requirement that a red flag
warning not be in effect when
anyone chooses to do a
prescriber in what are normally
the windiest months of the year.
And I urge you to do that.
I want to stop and turn this
over to to mery K. route to just
add a few comments some staff of
the statement taken from the
testimony the Mescalero Apache
tribe made during that the
second Senate conservation
committee meeting.
He stated and the Mescaleros are
arguably the best group.
At managing their forced in the
state.
And he stated they don't burn
during the spring because you've
just to date.
Show more again you could add a
few college.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is merry came
through I'm a resident of the
kindness canyon in San Miguel
County I'm sorry.
I'm trying not to cry today but.
In the current speaker Jeff
canyon fire the fire was started
under red flag day.
It seems a common sense measure
to say let's number non reflect
ace that's it it I would like to
know said after we rebuild
whenever that happens.
I would like to note that it's
not going to bring down again.
So that fire led to.
I heard home burned to the
ground by sisters.
My mother.
My mother lost everything and
following the fire things which
we did in the fire we lost in
the floods so I had a bridge.
Over the river I lost in the
second part of animal pens spend
it for the first.
But not the third fourth and
fifth flights.
Our family property across the
river.
we lost our largest Calvin.
This is the a property question
like you know we've been in
continuous operation since
nineteen thirty five.
And it's it's been something
that's meant a lot to a lot of
of children and families over
the years.
Thank you.
Got filled up we scripted back
out again and again we had
national National Guard came and
put lots of sandbags and I kept
the cabins from completely
washing away he did get mud in
the bottom we can't run.
I don't know when we'll be in
business again we can't health
groups up there it's too
dangerous not because the fire
danger but the flooding we just
can't let their and now that
room for.
Which is had water system that
provides all the water for Las
Vegas and all are all our
agriculture all the way up and
down the valley.
No rivers polluted I don't know
if people are going to be able
to fish a lot of people in Las
Vegas.
Eight what the from fishing or
from hunting and now this food
sources are not available for
them.
There have been many built in
many efforts by our.
Our state elected officials to
help and make sure that another
building infrastructure.
At some point I'm sure someone
will come and clean up debris.
But it none of those things try
to prevent the next fire so in
our congressional delegation has
done an amazing job absolute
pressed and I know I feel very
supported by that and our
communities to this well.
But you know as a volunteer
firefighter I feel like we know
better we knew it was a red flag
day we told people up and down
the canyon stop burning your
brush and that's that's not a
law you can bring your
restaurant right flag day but
it's just not the smartest thing
you ever did.
Maybe wait till it's a little
bit less wind.
We get high high winds we had a
wind event a few years ago and
write it prime that and I back
up to National Forest we had
winds in excess of a hundred
miles an hour we have sixty foot
pine trees that were uprooted by
you know all the way up an
entire whole sites that went
down so this is just
it's about the people it's about
the environment our animal life
and and the way of life as well
so.
I just wanted to be here so that
you hear from somebody who is
impacted directly.
And if you have questions I'll
do my best to answer them thank
you use the reason L..
Thank you Mr Mr chair we're
we're stand for questions so we
were about ten minutes of
advocacy will here's ten minutes
in opposition and therefore
individuals who registered to
speak.
or or McCarthy the state
foresters Herod and may.
You.
Present law office the sorry.
And Caleb Stotts those four
individuals are going to be
recognized for up to two minutes
miss McCarthy.
Yes.
R. as in.
It's best for the folks there
was please do so
four out of one of the state.
Mr chair
here
Mr chair there we go okay Mister
chair senators my name is Laura
McCarthy I'm the state forester
that means I work at the energy
minerals and natural resources
department as the forestry
division director
You know ms route has of.
Describes the pain and suffering
caused by the hermit's peak cash
canyon fire in ways that only
someone who went through that
experience can describe.
And I share the anger the
outrage and and the knowledge
that the losses are tragic and
the land and the people are
never going to recover.
At the same time I oppose the
legislation we oppose the
legislation because it doesn't
accomplish anything to change
future outcomes it doesn't
repair the damage that's been
done and it doesn't send a
message to the U. S. Forest
Service who is really the target
of our collective anger at what
happened.
Some types of natural lands in
some circumstances and
conditions require moderate wind
driven fire to be healthy some
examples pinyon juniper
woodlands where the goal is to
reduce overgrown brush and tree
seedlings without damaging the
seed bank in the soil so you
need a fast moving fire also
grazed woodlands and grasslands
where the grass is sparse and
wind is needed to carry the
prescribed fire.
Legislation is a blunt tool to
address the range of management
situations where the risk of
prescribed burn is skate is less
than the risk of catastrophic
wildfire and so wild the permits
P. can cast canyon fire was a
terrible fire we also had the
black fire the McBride fire that
no Galle fire Senator to law
though Cookes peak midnight and
bear trap none of those were
started by a prescribed fire and
all of those put people at
harm's way prescribed burning is
the tool that we need it's one
of the tools that we need it's
not the only tool it's one of
them that's why the prescribed
burning Act passed in twenty
twenty one Senator Wirth was one
of our sponsors provided the
tool of prescribed burning to
help make New Mexico safer it
established a certified
prescribed burn manager program
to provide training for
landowners one more sentence and
then I'll finish up and it
requires a model permit for
local government thank you
senator thank you chairman.
the main.
Your recognize for the two
minutes please.
Good afternoon.
Then okay good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee Senator creeks my name
is Serra da may.
I am on the board of the New
Mexico prescribed fire council
I'm also a landowner I have been
through multiple catastrophic
fires personally how my own
property as well
I have been a prescribed fire
practitioner federal and private
lands for almost twenty five
years also my passion is helping
people like Mrs route who have
been affected by these fires
and and will be affected by
these fires I'm here to speak in
opposition to Senate bill twenty
one I do appreciate the intent
to proactively reduce the chance
of an escaped burn.
however effective permitting
process these are already in
place to deal with this issue
one private input on federal
lands additionally the
prescribed burning Act has as
mentioned was that was passed in
twenty twenty one for the
specific purpose of making
prescribed fire safer and more
effective on on for for
nonfederal practitioners I argue
at that this is not an extremely
a layer of protection and will
not prevent another permits P.
calf canyon my family and I have
been burning on our own lands
for decades we lived on in
holding within federal lands in
the heinous mountains our
property has been directly
impacted by many wildfires over
the years including less
conscious Serra Grande the Serra
plot of fire most recently our
house and most of our trees
still stand because of the work
in the burning that we do every
spring and every fall for us the
risk of not burning as much more
than the risk of with the risk
of burning is much less than the
risk of not burning thing excuse
me.
Senate bill twenty one would
restrict the ability of
landowners like us to reduce
hazardous fuels on our
properties ahead of fire season.
The bottom line is that for most
of us that live on the front
lines within forested lands in
New Mexico we must be able to
defend our own lands against the
effects of high severity
wildfire and to do this we need
the flexibility to utilize safer
and windows in the spring
included we need support I ask
that the implementation of burn
bans remain within with fire
professionals at the county
level and within the prescribed
burning Act and the model burn
permit development process thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
otherwise otherwise thank you Mr
chairman committee
Yes my colleague with the the
nature Conservancy I just want
to let you know as a sent a
message into the email to try to
get some some time here too but
the wasn't called up earlier I
don't know if there's an
opportunity for people to use
okay thank you so my name is a
time crystal of ski a deputy
director at the far storage kids
we are a national nonprofit
organization with roots in
northern New Mexico the guild
has been practicing prescribed
fire for ten years in New Mexico
on all lands we are nonfederal
we're a nonfederal fire
practitioner organization and we
worry about red flag days to
before during and after we burn
So that when we do bring it's
safe and responsible read flat
or red flag warnings are issued
when fuels humidity and winds
all aligned to create rapid fire
spread and the kids my
organization we never laid a
burn on a red flag day and we
don't think others should either
but we think this bill would
create a precedent to restrict
private landowners and non
federal land managers and so for
that reason we oppose the Senate
bill twenty one and I think that
the prescriber inning Act passed
last year just as others have
said create the tools in the
process these so that we can be
use this tool safely and
effectively thank you.
You will start to recognize for
the two minutes.
Hi everybody I am on soon can
folks here yes we can do.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members opportunity opportunity
to respectfully oppose SB twenty
one my name is Gail stops nine
and seconded director chalky
flame alliance our mission is to
practice conservation in the Rio
Chama in San Juan Chama
watershed we're gonna
restriction
watershed partnerships we focus
on private land.
Our first express my condolences
to the folks who were so
terribly impacted by the fire
inspired this legislation and
I do wish to express the
concern about possible.
On the land owners that we work
with we never live firing a in
spring and he would not be able
to come in the one of.
On the legislation is in
response to activities on
federal lands my understanding
is that this legislation is
geared towards not federal lands
private hands my understanding
is that these sorts of issues
are best addressed the permit
process.
Many of the state's force of
water resources are risks and
wildfire we don't think this
bill to amend prescribed fire
acts and she legislation is one
tool to address a wide range of
management situation where the
risk of prescribed burning is
less than the risk of
catastrophic wildfires I knew
personally and lightning strikes
kills campers as the greatest
threats of severe one more
service what we need is more
financial resources to address
these really the issues
particularly private land which
make up about forty percent of
the state's force researchers.
Finally some types of natural
lands your requirement during
the win and Revenue fire to be
healthy landowners and land
managers the conditions in some
circumstances to get at is our
treatment and this is Laura
currently dress that some of
those examples that concludes my
comments thank you very much
thank you Mr.
That concludes the Richard
opponents.
Presentation members of the
committee.
Question center more center
first thank you Mr
Representative will on this
route for prehistoric tension.
Read the bill one of the public
yes four others were saying that
we would eliminate was called
one school and we will limit
prescribed burns Mr chair
are operated this is hardly a
long pool when we're talking
about three months of the year.
What it's really freaking Wendy
and the federal government says
it's really for him when the you
don't Starfire's side since
really for economic
Mr chair Senator about what am I
missing.
Mr chair Senator the as I said
at the at the end of builders
not stop you from doing a
prescribed burn and you stop you
from doing it in those three
months when the National Weather
Service has issued red flag
warnings show the
the for service the state forced
Forster they can all do fire
anytime throughout the year.
And even in the spring when
weather conditions allow it and
show some part of the argument
Mr chair nations which is
something that I I struggle with
I don't I don't understand
because I think we've given them
every opportunity to do what
they need to do.
And also protect the New
Mexicans
that live close to to the
national forced to the state for
even on the on the eastern
plains because the user you know
they're not restricted just to
the forest we've had major
grassland fires that have been
very damning damaging and maybe
possibly had more people killed
in those then we had in the
force far.
So.
Mr chair Senator I I can't
answer your question.
summarized on the other side of
the pool and services in person
reactive as are going to go back
to the lower calf fire and and
Mr chair the right sort of
reading of fact cap are
deserving of bears burned down
from six seventy years before
the start of the stuff up there
again.
And you know since the work what
is been used Mr chair it's the
to all the blog the federal
government is a horrible
stewards of our environment in
New Mexico you know from super
cell phone sites to Albuquerque
oil spills to uranium mines
serving also talked about they
do a horrible job managing our
our national forests and we're
the ones living here and and I
just wanna be blocked maybe the
the one for the federal
government listening stopped
during our thank you for staff
and this is just a little sign
of the telephone bill more
careful it's really windy thank
you Mr chair thank you
Secretary.
Thank you Mr chair
I tend to agree with Senator
Moores on this
It seems like common sense okay.
At all back up to the I really
like the changes that were made
in the conservation committee I
think they really narrow this to
just.
Red flag warning days within
that time frame language that
was in there before give me a
little bit of heartburn but with
this language and if it does
seem appropriately narrowed I
actually have a question for our
our state forester
As you referred to wind driven
fires which is I I didn't know
that was that was something that
that is done.
We are ready the kinds of winds
that you'll have on a red flag
day are those kind of the kinds
of wins that you want for a wind
driven fire.
If you if you can come up to us
to the microphone to answer.
Mr chair and senator hit the
button.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Duhigg there's it's a little
more complex that so a red flag
warning is issued for his own
and of course of the zone is
fairly large and they're going
to be microclimates within that
zone so that's the the first
answer is.
The red flag warning is
the actual conditions on the
ground may very secondly the
burning conditions are also
affected by the moisture both in
the vegetation itself and in the
ground and that's going to be
very site And please specific
thirdly the state forester have
also has the ability to issue a
local regional or statewide fire
ban and that is the tool that we
use ought to shut down
prescribed burning when we feel
it is unsafe.
And Mr chair
the card the and I'm sorry I've
had to that is not your facial
title for Forster McCarthy
I guess my question is.
Is the state forester doing
prescribed burns on red flag
days.
Madam chair Mr chair and
senator.
It's a more complicated answer
than that as well so those the
forestry division does not do
the direct land management the
state land office will do make
them the defined all decisions
for what happens on the state
trust lands and as far as
private landowners than those
state forestry agency is in the
role of providing management
guidance and of fire protection
and again has the ability to put
fire restrictions in place.
Mr chair for some credit so I
guess in your put in in that
position and I'm trying to get
to a simple yes or no here and
and it might not exist
are you aware of on public state
lands are being prescribed burns
on red flag days that serve a
regular practice in New Mexico.
Mr chair and senator on the fish
and Wildlife Service lands yes
it is a regular practice and and
as of Senator Griggs said
after the committee substitute
the energy minerals and natural
resources department was neither
supporting nor opposing and in
the last five days a lot of the
information is been brought to
us about various management
practices and concerns from
actually and managers that the
discretion and the professional
judgment based on years of
experience in could be
undermined.
Thank you.
You Mr chair I.
I am I am kind of turn on this
because it it it feels like it
is common sense that when it's
to do when we're telling the
public and that is as just
looking up red flag warnings and
says
don't throw cigarettes are
matches out of your moving
vehicle when there's a red flag
and extinguish all outdoor fires
and properly and never and I
and.
The where sparks and embers and
and it's it's hard for me to
reconcile that we're telling the
public that and general reflect
days but we're saying.
But if you are you want to burn
on your private land and that's
okay
And and I'm a little and and it
might be because I don't
understand forestry that it
gives me pause that our state
lands that we are doing burns
during red flag days it it just
feels like a common sense issue
but I'm I'm hearing it might be
more nuanced than that I that
said I I think I'm inclined to
support the bill thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator Wirth
and Center o'neill in senators
so each recognize for up to five
minutes.
I thank you Mr chair Senator
creeks just a couple interesting
points on the night we just want
the whole discussion of federal
preemption.
And I just want to be clear for
the same reason that I think
most lawyers up here we're
saying that the last bill we
just debated was federally
preempted I think this is going
to affect the federal
government's I think they're
gonna have a different
tradition.
And maybe we can make the
argument but again I think that
what I've learned I I listening
here is that if it certainly
will affect.
The state both private State
Land.
And I I guess I have to say and
I I was the Sanchez I you know I
think a lot of heat in the
district I represent because I
do believe.
Prescribed burning is an
important tool and the
alternative I mean we're hearing
you know the horror of what
you've been through when a
prescribed burn is clearly done
wrong but the reality is if we
don't have to work with our for
us I mean we're just gonna be
continuing this.
Living these fires there's no
way around that
You know having said that I mean
I think it's interesting that.
You know miss McCarthy I respect
tremendously you know was
neutral in this kind of limited
idea came up initially and then
we got some.
Some professionals in the back
room that want to keep this open
as a tool but I will tell you I
mean the testimony revert in
opposition you should not burn a
red flag day you could never
secure permit on a red flag day
and added that the reality here
there is a common sense
component to this that that
Senator doing.
You know makes a valid point on
I mean I sit here and say.
It just seems like.
A no brainer don't start
prescribed burn on a red flag
day and if and if and if there's
some technician thanks maybe
under some circumstances that's
going to work.
You know maybe that works.
Most of the time but the minute
it doesn't work and actually see
what happens and what what what
what look at the devastation
that was caused because the
senator said in the federal
government made a terrible
mistake here and so again I
also.
You know leaning towards sending
this.
It's a signal to the federal
government again I don't think
it's really gonna do anything to
the federal government because
it's going to be preempted what
it will do something to the
states and and that's an
important message that I just
think this build up I would not
support of this bill I told you
that when I was in the committee
to wage practice I'm also gonna
say I think that the dates you
put in here for Representative
flaxseed interesting.
With climate change what we're
seeing trying to limit this to a
red flag window that the short
three months I think we're gonna
be looking at that more more
because we're seeing more and
more extreme weather.
At different times throughout
the year and they're just going
to be those moments when it may
be in July that that you should
not be we've got a red flag day
in July I think we've seen those
could be in the fall and I just
think quite frankly something if
this moves forward you may want
to look at the breadth of trying
to narrow it down just during
that window which makes sense
when you start of the bill but
now that you've got it near the
red flag days I just throw that
out there is something that I
think we should look at because
I don't think the issue is
limited to just those those
months anymore so.
Again I appreciate appreciate
you know the fact that you've
worked on this on this bill and
and I think that the way it was
introduced.
Was too restrictive.
bought now it's now it's dealing
with specific issue and I think
it's a discussion that.
You know we need to happen and
maybe we're we just following
policy makers step in and say
you know the professionals who
think this is something they
might be able to do on this
particular red flag day with
your type of forest just don't
do it I mean I think we do have
the ability to say that and
that's what this bill is doing
so that's what I have Mister
chair to see you as a
representative Senator.
That Hey I thank you
it's support us.
For common sense I mean you know
they've got with all due respect
I got nine months to do whatever
you want with your.
Okay you can.
I just feel this is an important
signal to send and I work for
thoroughly supportive of it and
I'm glad that senator grace was
able to resurrect this bill
intended to work with thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto up to five and
thank you Mr chairman so.
I.
I still trying to do.
And and also here.
The the actuals isn't.
We at the state level these we
we managed to stop and I'm here
all right.
I I also know that what's that.
With the statute is currently
right.
Is that.
It's as though they'd shut the
representative for stripper on
land or property except when.
The state forester.
For County municipality issues
restrictions prohibiting
Freiberg.
Because of drug.
And and that's the only services
right now yes probably they're
allowed to say for.
And and so what concerns me is
as.
I
these things come up different
times as there will be at at my
requirements of what's.
but we were still not in power
in.
Yes because that is a state
forecast for to consider.
With the school.
Mr chairman and senator the
You know the red flag warning
has three components it has a
high temperatures low humidity
and strong winds.
And the the latter two were the
greatest influence currently on
wildfire activity
show the red flag warning deals
with land for that particular
date and time you'll see red
flag warnings and and for some
cards the indicated you choose
them some of you see for
statewide some of you see for
county wide some of you receive.
The chair side table Terrel
county in the western side of of
any county.
Which is the the mountains down
there primarily shows a red flag
warnings are not to you know are
not always.
Really brought sometimes are
very specific
The law that the law that we
we're talking about the
prescribed burn all.
Almost.
Directly deals with private
property.
it's not trying to indicate to
the the state for sure or the
State Land Office when they can
do a prescribed burn H. dealing
with landowners you can do a
provide prescribers.
It also sichern says if a
landowner decides to get these
training what they can do a
prescribed burn with
you know the.
The issues you could get away
from them they they have
liability the changes for what
happened if they don't get the
training they have double
liability for what have.
But they're the only one.
If the state makes a mistake.
The state didn't have double
liability
Courting them our state any more
liability.
So I'm not sure Mr chairman and
senator that.
Yeah we're getting where we need
to be if we don't do this
because basically says that we
just can't build that doesn't
mean it's.
Just the landowner Manges
everybody just can't do it I
mean this is a it's a forty six
page document right here talking
about how to do more.
It still happens which do they
do.
And it gives away from and it Mr
chairman and senators you know
the.
You've heard Mary Kay.
We heard several people like
that up in Las Vegas.
The next time and there will be
a next time.
As best we try there will be a
next time and and and Mr
chairman and senator I I'm aware
of that I guess my my concern
about the way this bill is
structured okay.
Is that if there's a red so so
person doesn't verses that the
prescriber gets permanent.
Representative correct so Mr
chairman and senator Chris we
know was going to prescribe or.
If there's a prescribed burn.
Up in the middle of June
I'm sorry if there's a if
there's a reflected in the
middle of June.
Not only does this time for not
apply.
But the state forester the
counting and municipalities have
no ability under the statute the
state department.
So I guess what I'm asking
Mister chairman Senator rex.
Is if.
Your concerns are perhaps better
addressed.
I simply on page one line twenty
five.
It's sort of the worst for with.
So that it would say that.
Thank you all right conduct
prescribed burns except when the
state forester or kindness
politicians restrictions
Representative prescriber
because of drop or wind
conditions.
And then.
Frankly I think that's all you
need.
Because it allows than
regardless of whether it's a
yellow flag flag.
Regardless of whether it's in
this time frame for another time
frame.
It allows the Forrester the cat
in this analogy to call someone
and say look I know they're
permitted to do this you can't
do right now we conditions to.
And the where shares Center that
that may be that may be a better
approach.
I can't I can't actually just
jump to it and and agree that
way I don't know that
that gets around I would guess
Katie short of of preemption
because that's only dealing with
someone who has to apply for a
permit
federal government Lee has to
apply for permanent and more you
could probably say that okay.
And this is.
The the approach that you're
you're indicating doesn't really
send them the message.
And.
I don't know and and senator
Sanchez and I talked a little
bit about preemption side of it
in it maybe it's their maybe
it's not the.
But at some point I guess the
the state needs to think about
one issues that occur in the
land.
Within the boundaries of the
State.
Where we need to step up and
just say you know.
This is what we see this is the
problem we see and we don't want
those problems.
and.
Mr chairman and senator.
I live just outside the Lincoln
National Forest.
I've seen the forced Berlin.
I know what that the.
And so the question is let's get
some points please I'm sure
we're we're.
Going through the same thing
over and over again it's we're
we're going to circle around and
write Mitchell first released.
For all think about the rest of
the bills won't but I I I do
want to power the experts bill
to do something.
So regardless of the weather so
on page twenty five afterwards
runs.
I would I would need to insert
that Pfizer the work for women.
Research and we're on the edge
one line twenty five.
After the we're dropped into our
Portland.
So that would say except for the
state for sure kind of in this
body issues restrictions
prohibiting prescriber because a
drop for windows to.
That has the support of the
state forestry admission is sure
sure I proceeded from amendment.
C..
More discussion.
Any objection amendment up in
terms of all right I will.
Encourage you to come in the
form for that is those two words
of the only thing in the bill.
The shares generally happy to
talk to you further about that
absolutely thank you Senator I
am.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
know if anybody can answer this
about how many red flag warnings
we have in these months.
Mr chairman Mr chair from she
she came.
Mr chair and senator it varies
widely as part of the analysis
around what happened with
hermits peak have canyon fire we
put together a twenty year
retrospective where we looked at
the number of red flag days per
month over the last twenty years
and just to use April as an
example.
The highest number was twenty
two and the lowest number was
three it varies widely.
Chairman thank you for that that
help put that down.
So
You know I appreciate for all
the reasons stating you you the
very thing in opposition to this
understand that so what.
What can we do if we're not
telling the federal government
to stop doing that prescribed
burns one it's too windy what
else can we do to stop them from
doing that because they didn't
stop in New Mexico they've just
done the same thing in
California with the same result
so how is it that you think we
might be able to get them to
understand the weather in New
Mexico better than they
obviously are.
Mr chair and senator I think
that Senator Ivy Soto put his
finger on the appropriate lever
when the state forester puts
fire restrictions in place the
federal government does stop
burning that is all all long
standing agreement and that's
the reason for that is that we
share the responsibility for
wildfire response we meet every
day through the spring as an
interagency community to make
determinations about the
conditions it's windy it's
moisture it's humidity it's also
the availability of resources
airplanes helicopters ground
crews to be able to respond if
something goes wrong and so I do
believe that adding we and to
the state foresters ability to
shut down prescribed burning
either locally or across the
board is the appropriate tool.
Well this chairman who knew
Senator Ivey Soto it to work
would fix the staff.
Thank you thank you for those
comments.
You committee.
The best.
This motion passed like you just
have to ask you a few comments
take the motion the most whether
by I.
Join you in conservation
committee and voted against
tabling this bill because I
thought it was important to have
the discussion we had here today
we came back conservation added
so.
Things to roost
I've told you before and I think
you can devote against bill I
think.
Government should have the
flexibility at times and we had
a very windy few days later last
month here in Santa Fe
nobody wins in different times
we again I'd like in this to of
a NASA launching of people to
get involved decision decide to
go or not go on any given day
and we trust smart people make
those decisions more people
sometimes make mistakes and I'm
gonna terribly sorry about the
consequences of bad judgment
here to expect the federal
government will pay dearly for a
the result of that bad judgment
and I don't we learn from that
but but to say we're gonna do it
in certain months seem to be
tying our hands to be that seems
very arbitrary and and one of
things that seems most important
we oftentimes and Services
business person but also
governments have some
flexibility and be able to rely
on judge of hopefully people
exercise the judgment do so
knowledgeable intelligent.
One of the past motion.
Representative right I just
sent.
What.
Just being so there's nothing
ever quite with Senator.
Levels yeah that would be just
simply the right things at the
sessions see the section.
All right.
What is that allowing access
would you said yes then is
working.
And I appreciate that we meet
the amendment and at that point
time the amended bill really has
no meaning to me the it really
has.
Anyway because you will have a
consequence so it says you can
do this well if I do it so what
there's nothing really says what
consequences doing it is so that
usually three words in the
mobile area memorials right we
we don't use but we do do this.
We'll go from that you will
shake our finger and negatively
with service are you available
at the moment you can and most
of those who are goes this chart
and I'll just point out that
that is active.
What is is that it gives for to
be able to this job at a special
session.
To be able to.
Stoppers which I think is very
important of.
So
this price of sections The New
Mexico.
Eight.
Drug conditions.
Those members district the
underlying tax on page one line
twenty twenty one right
secession State.
More than
others.
Senator was Senators.
You know
Mr chairman I think at as soon
not do that
they have if Senator Ivy Soto
would like to talk a little bit
about it in the four would
possibly go to for I mean it's
just it's a little bit.
More than I'm ready to get my
head around because that's the
poll that's the change that we
may.
Wish to it was bad subsection
C..
And subsection seeds designed to
send a message to everyone.
Not to burn during the windiest
time here.
That she's purpose and I I think
we've when we do some of the
other we've just not done.
And.
And I I agree with Senator
Sanchez about memorials also but
I also say that.
This is a little more important
than a memorial to many people
were hurt to me the residential
lost it's not going to change
unless we send a strong message
and so center I'm a take it is
an unfriendly amendment but I'm
certainly willing to talk about
it if this bill gets out of
committee.
Mr Chairman initiative
collaboration all looked
from and then the Senate will
travel center great.
More than.
This chart that we.
The members of the Senate
debate.
Hi so you want to recognize so
many members Senator Baca.
this is a and which was
amendment so but but I agree
with the chair that the the
dates to seem arbitrary to me
March first through may thirty
first so I would I would post
then to see if you consider it
from there not that some on page
two to strive on line seven
from the word on to line eight
to work here so that you would
be a prescriber shall not be
conducted when national service
with weather service has issued
a red flag warning and the
remainder of its have drought
warnings and you have a baseline
of the red flag conditions so
that's a red flag the Mr chair
we don't for.
And we also have the drop or
wins which is the discretionary
portion that that may be just a
was seven in two thousand
sixteen members.
chairman I'd consider that for
the discussion of the proposed
amendment through clearly.
Families always has
Senator high school.
I think that is I like the
amendment.
Needs a little bit more as you
say prescribers shall not be.
With the National Weather
Service has issued a red flag
warning for that day.
For the area works planned to
take place I suppose that could
state is that they refers to you
know R. twenty may thirty one.
Yes so it's it's not you know
stop pointing to any particular
day I don't know really.
Representative morning.
You could just take out for the
day for the area where the
prescribed burns planned to take
place.
It sounds.
Even better
even better.
Thank you.
Sure your budget yes all right.
thank you Mr Robert on the
amendment as it stands right now
with the other discussion on the
proposed.
Everybody is doing in our the
amendments adopted there being
no objection.
Senator Baca used for I have
nothing else.
Passes twice.
Well as forty.
I appreciate and and I I think
it's a far far better over the
amendment still still opposes
Center for results press release
with much further to where I
want to go it does have a
consequence number one I I
appreciate use it several times
you want to send a message you
want to send a very strong
message I understand that again
given the consequences of this
as a lawyer and past statutes
thinking about senator and
really want to have a bill that
says people shall do something
in there should be a consequence
for not doing things and this
doesn't do that so to me this
still is a strong message yes
but that's not all to me so
we're on the bill as amended is
there any objection to pass
motion other than me.
C. line you have to have some
thank you very.
Members of the committee.
The.
The if you're.
About senator sixty five million
years okay.
We have about.
Ingle.
All right Representative we've
got a hard stop at six o'clock
we're going to try to do this
one about thirty or forty five.
Is Senate bill forty thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
I have a Senate bill forty
before you today which
strengthens and clarifies and
moves us in the right direction
with regard to helping folks
that are in the armed forces on
active duty to actually be able
to have a remote marriage should
one of the parties need that for
whatever reason
I do have an amendment before
you today it is two two four
nine three two dot one native
deliver that to the committee
secretary earlier I have a brief
comment that's going to be made
by my expert witness here
ProPublica's an ordained
minister has conducted over
three thousand of the ceremonies
over the years and she's the one
that brought this information to
me from the land issues that
conducted this and found that
there was a problem we needed to
resolve and that's why we're
doing attending this today.
Mr chairman senators I
appreciated the almost thirty
five hundred weddings I'm the
wedding chapel in Albuquerque
I have yes on many occasions I
have done
I've done ceremonies for people
who are in the ceremony who are
in the military currently one of
them is stationed here or the
other one lives here and the
other one has to join them.
Now we currently I'm looking to
be able to do proxy ladies we
currently Candie proxy what is
in New Mexico I'm looking for
double proxy weddings perhaps
the family has moved
out of state and he served in
the military now he has been
deployed someplace else and they
need that to be married in a
timely fashion and he cannot get
leave in a timely fashion
perhaps they need family
insurance family housing because
of the family that was left
behind whether it's in New
Mexico or or they've already
left here
they need spousal support or for
other reasons beyond love.
In recent years the demand for
it remote weddings
has increased and with the onset
of COVID hi it is exacerbated
this demand.
Thank you for being very nice
and concise so took the step to
speak to the to my point County
clerk Bernalillo county clerk
Linda Stover as well as
secretary of state Maggie
Toulouse Oliver can take a look
at the bill they don't have any
issues with regard to to some of
the items they were already in
it we did agree by taking
feedback from members of this
committee that we would bring an
amendment to you to further
clarifying when this would be
allowed and so with the
amendment in front of you items
one to relief of foreign I add
extra language to make sure that
this is because that party is on
active duty as a member of the
armed forces of the United
States so that this was this
measure in this act would only
pertain to those individuals
because of that that that
purpose and then we went ahead
and brought item number three in
the amendment which is page four
line sixteen through twenty.
Of we want to basically and not
sure what the legal least term
is but I'm strike that and bring
that back into the legislation
as a result of the of some
feedback some of the members of
the committee which would allow
you essentially to one
application to a judge with your
affidavit the court for good
cause would authorize you to do
so if one of the parties is
unable to personally appear you
can select a proxy to stand
there for you and signed the
license and and and move forward
so that's what the member does.
Thank you C..
We're going to give me the
specifics on the amendment we
the only person we have
identified.
In support is miss ****.
And so we turn to the moment and
members the committee with
questions on that.
So just to clarify and Mr chair
Senator.
Make it so that.
With this money make is that if
you are active duty military.
The proxy wedding addition
affidavit to the county clerk
is not active duty military
would still go.
The application to the District
Court to do across the way
that's correct Mr chairman and
vice chair and and for excellent
feedback that we receive from
from folks here and that's what
we want to bring line sixteen
through twenty on page four back
to the back of the table.
So I have Mister.
Questions.
So that the admin.
The motion for the.
The discussion.
Objection option.
Same.
Dr.
Committee members says Newman.
Representative.
I think this gentleman seven I
hi
Concerns about this bill it is
marginally better because of
with the.
The.
Amendments that I will note
that.
That.
Our staff is identified that.
We already provide the ability
for for more slices we should
for someone who for good because
unable to appear personally in
the kind of clerk's office so I
don't think this is necessary.
There's nothing that stops any
member of the military from
getting married.
Or or anybody else who cannot
appear personally.
and so you know it is
So in that regard this this is
fixing problem Mr chairman that
I don't think exists.
because any person can on
official the objective of this
report can go and and get an
authorization for someone who's
not able to be present.
regardless of whether they're in
the military or not.
The other the other thing is
that.
New Mexico has had in the past a
very bad relationship.
With proxy weddings.
they have been used and in some
of
problematic ways in the past.
The the amendment also.
The the amendment also
Seems to to to confuse the
issue.
Of the issuance of the license
with how the ceremony will take
place.
and and it does so in in terms
of specifically.
it doesn't just deal with the
issuance of the license at the
end of.
That that they will choose a
proxy for the wedding Act at.
You know I'd.
I personally believe that
someone are participating or
what.
and and
You know if even if someone is
in the military and their
deployed.
they can get happens on a
regular basis were they put this
late in what is.
and so.
And so the fact that you that
you have
in here
frankly under this if someone
were to file this affidavit they
they would be precluded.
From being able to press
participate in their own
wedding.
And the.
And I think that's a problem I
think it's a problem for us to
tell people that they're not
able to participate in a
wedding.
because this requires
appointment of an adult of the
of the other part of the
marriage to act as proxy for the
purpose of participating in the
ceremony.
and so I just you know I don't
think that's good policy.
Of the I don't think it's good
policy to.
To simply allow someone to
follow notarized affidavit.
And have a marriage license
issued.
Of the the reason why we have
people go to the District Court
for the question on.
Is so that so that the the judge
has the discretion.
and.
And this is putting them the
county officials the situation
where they receive the something
maybe wrong they don't.
They don't have the authority to
to do anything about it and
So right I just this is this is
up the well I well I'm sensitive
to the issue surrounding
deployed members of the military
being able to to wet the.
This particular approach I'm
doing a a proxy weddings
I don't think is the correct
approach that we should take and
we already have in statute the
ability of somebody who cannot
appear personally to be able to
to get a amerisource.
For the moment that's it.
Right.
Well so we just make a couple
comments when I I was thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator I
was so the we have a lot of we
have a lot of conversations over
the weekend on this and I would
say that
just respectfully disagree with
about two thirds with the
senator to set I think a lot of
what he said is is yes it's
possible I mean nothing
precludes individual if they can
participate they can participate
is and stop them from doing that
and and pro had another comment
on the actual issue a proxy
with.
Mr chair
and Senators these these are
applications that the military
will still have to for they are
requesting the proxy marriage
we're not precluding there and
they are requesting proxy
merit by application the same
application that they have to do
if they were here in the state
they have to guarantee that
they're not related that they
have met many other things they
have to prove their identity
they have to have it notarized
same as it the county clerk to
get we're looking for double
proxy weddings we already
currently do single proxy of
ceremonies or applications we're
looking for both military very
that both military or one is
already followed the person
who's in the military and this
may be stuck somewhere else
maybe they're from New Mexico
maybe they're they're not but
they are applying to be proxy
because they have extenuating
circumstances some of which I
mentioned I have done almost
thirty five hundred weddings
everybody gets married primarily
because they're in love they
want to be married and they want
to do it in person so if they
request that we can do the
ceremony online they're looking
for paperwork as soon as they
are
married as soon as they're able
to be together they will get
married maybe on bass line one
of our military officers that
they want the formal ceremony we
are doing this paperwork to be
able to help them achieve their
purpose for your call.
We've been through of the
members on try to find something
that and that was here SO
Senator that we I miss you I so
you're looking at Senator
Moores.
Mr.
One of the service.
Mr L..
I will know that this is not
require that you the person be a
resident of New Mexico have any
relation to New Mexico.
And we're gonna be issuing.
particularly you just for the
the the the experts say that
she's interested in doing double
proxy weddings the the the
person present.
The require that November that
either person before New Mexico
I just think.
I'm sensitive to the concerns
this approach.
Is very problematic Mr chairman
I would move to table.
There's a motion table and non
debatable.
Before I take the motion to I
can just ask one question I did
I have a they have anyone else
on the.
Request to speak at.
I remember elector sometimes
early in the session due to too
much to cut off debate to really
but it will be the first order
of business center of just a
question for reason for the and
and the quick questions make it
and this is this is discussion I
had with the with the lawyers on
the staff business already all
possible can't can't can't
they've now do this.
Not that good Mr chair it's my
understanding that one person at
least has to be present there is
another state that does this
successfully for many years and
they have just been
Again the demand has been
exacerbated during the COVID yes
my question more specifically as
a member of the military healthy
would without having the present
under existing law New Mexico
provided his fiance is here in
New Mexico yes and with the
judge or or or with the judge
yes thank you that's answer my
question all right we're on a
table in motion motion is not
debatable would do this by roll
call motions to table Senator
Baca.
Just.
Center I'm so the distance
Center course yes.
Central New.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Duhigg no.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator yes Representative I do
four the bill is tabled Senate
bill forty.
Thank you thank you senator of
submergence echo changes Senate
bill sixty five.
Their Buck.
in unicenter Bockenheim.
Sir Baca Canary of ask you to
postpone from enrollment center
on the commitments I think about
somebody else question one with
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle
works so well.
Ingle we don't have center how
to meal here either he was out
are all busy is not a meal
party.
Bring him in there.
What is the.
It is.
Thanks for.
That's your job.
Thank you for.
Thank you.
Thank you senators on Senate
bill thirty.
Just ahead.
Thank you madam chair today we
have before you Senate bill two
thirty this is a bill that has
been for a committee before two
years ago it flew through here
quite easily with the help of
the expert testimony of the
captain Kevin very this
essentially will just go to
fight the mounted patrol within
a portion of the statute that
that really need to be in
because if they're not located
in those questions that you
they're not able to get was
called in or I number from the
FBI so our volunteer police
force that's helping out in
Travis county
in our northern counties as well
as food you'll and others are
not able to get radios or armor
or other things that they need
to help police and and these are
volunteers so I think this is
just an important place to put
in it keeps in and and make sure
that we're not giving them
anymore forty we're just saying
they're gonna be restricted to
the same thing's Authority
restricted to they're gonna
continue to do the same things
that they're doing all we want
is for them to have body armor
and other things so with me
today I have Senator Haar meal
and then I have Mike Brooks
deputy chief Jeff brown captain
and then be is assumed I believe
state chief Kevin very.
So there are many different
features of the mounted patrol
was created in nineteen forty
one and if you look at
communities like Los Alamos for
we don't have a sheriff's posse
but one elected sheriff the
mounted patrol really comes in
to help with the lack of a
sheriff's department but they
come across the whole state and
helping in any ways of the cap
no in the able to get that for a
number it's needed because that
way they can get a any type of
requests there's one for bullet
proof vests that if given the O.
R. I would be able to apply for
a lot of these men and women
under mounted patrol are using
their own personal what funds to
ensure that they can help to
assist law enforcement officers
and so with that we'll go ahead
and go to and go to the expert
witness center for I think we're
gonna think a center we just go
to the committee if that.
Sure that's under two minutes
for your presentation so to
questions from the committee.
Are we so the proponents that
who have you had indicated did
you want this proponents to to
go ahead and speak on behalf of
the bill.
I I apologize Senator I took
Senator Pirtle answer to me that
they did not know and and madam
chair I don't I think they're
here just for expertise if
there's any questions on there
with the mounted patrol and if
if the committee would like to
hear from they can but it's it's
pretty straightforward madam
chair thank you and and no one
has signed up in opposition so
with that we'll go to the
committee.
Senator Moores and Senator mail
sure I see you're asking for
appropriation
to deter you put this requesting
your junior findings bills.
Senator it is a little over
ninety five thousand dollars and
I didn't put any of my two year
fund money into it.
And and madam chair this is been
put through the the house bill
two for for many years so thank
you.
Thank you senator on the off.
Thanks for reading this.
About this and not troll always
have to write our.
And madam chair and senator that
that's a misconception that that
many have I'm sure in its
founding they were of upon our
back but now they actually use
their own personal vehicles many
times or the right along with
other certified law enforcement
officer so a lot of times are
using their own personal
vehicles.
Shares we consider changing
their job description is wrong
this.
Committee for this and this is
not.
Thanks.
This is the the same forces
right Rogers.
And.
Senator Baca I would just move
it to pass.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you madam chair I.
Thank you were going I'm a
little concerned about the
syntax.
Some of
Up.
The so for example on page two
it's clear.
The the freezer using
throughout.
Refers to a member of the Max
amount of control.
and like wise for us to the
player as well as on page five
and definition for the purpose
of.
However.
When we get to.
And on and on page nine it's
clear.
right but then when we get to.
pages ten and eleven.
You.
The the sentence ends of the.
Members of the New Mexico state
police sheriffs and their shares
and their salary deputies
members of the municipal police
force and members New Mexico led
a patrol.
satisfactorily completed a basic
law enforcement from pursuant to
twenty nine six four one and
economic requests to provide law
enforcement assistance but
investment please from the line
for service different traits
that percent of these actions
may rest without work any
person.
The the clause beginning at
In that sense it is unclear.
If it is if it modifies only New
Mexico about a patrol.
Market modifies state police
shares their salary deputies
municipal police force and
members of the New Mexico
mountain.
In chair if you're suggesting
for the Oxford comma in I would
think that would be friendly.
And.
Mr Chairman servers pirtle as
much as you and I are.
Both aficionados of the of the
Oct would come up it is of
course rejected in New Mexico
but I don't think that fixes the
problem.
And and I guess.
Because.
Because we've already said the
arresting officer to be in
uniform.
Right and we've we've given a
dependency on page nine.
To remember the most amount of
control.
But I what I'm wondering.
Maybe we don't need that
additional language on pages ten
and eleven.
From who to the end of the
underline and madam chair
Senator I I believe you're
you're correct we've we've
established to the settlement
patrol is and therefore it's not
necessary in this.
Question of the statute for the
O. R. I. number in an exit row
yeah so Mister Mister at madam
chair I would.
on page ten.
One thirteen I was right from
the word food to the end of the
underlining online nineteen.
And likewise on page eleven line
ten.
I would strike from who the end
of the underlining online
sixteen.
And again not that those are
both sixty six eight in and six
to six eight and we've already
established in the previous
section the dependency of of how
it is out of control.
Madam this friendly.
I'm sorry so that's from it is
friendly thank you right a
special on the amendment.
Any objection to adopt.
That so much for your.
Right that amendment is adopted.
And madam chair I guess the only
other thing is is that.
I would I would be convinced
more of the earnestness.
of this bill if either one of
the Sanchez had use their junior
money to provide the ninety four
thousand five hundred sixty
dollars
For this appropriation.
That's a nonrecurring
nonrecurring exactly that we
need every year.
So thank you very much.
Discussion.
Back on the bills amended.
I will before we take up that
motion so Senators Irish.
I actually have heartburn about
this bill
because for example that part we
were just looking at on page
ten.
Allows the mounted patrol.
At the actually we took out the
language about the state
regulatory agency although that
would still apply Senator Ivey
Soto was saying so R. L. D. can
ask madam patrol to go arrest
someone without a warrant.
Under the US that that gives me
great poss
I also did I believe that the
the new training requirements
that were included in the
omnibus bill the.
Chair worked on so hard last
year are not weeks so the
training that is referenced here
for that matter please would not
doesn't include the new training
requirements that we have
adopted as a state and so this
they would actually be at a
lower level of training and
getting to arrest people without
warrants.
Because of regulatory agency has
requested them to do so that
gives me great concern
Hi I also think there's concerns
that the interplay of this with
our New Mexico Civil Civil
Rights Act and and for claims
act and when you're giving
notice to the public body under
either of those who is the
public body that you're giving
notice to is it the regulatory
agency that requested the
mounted patrol take action is
that the settlement control on
that's that's not clear to me
and I hear what you're saying
about the or I never issue and
and frankly getting O. R. I.
numbers from the feds in all
sorts of areas is ridiculously
difficult and I don't know why
but we see it out in the context
of of being able to do I really
thorough background checks off
as pertains that for for
cannabis applications as well
so if I don't know that.
That the federal government
being difficult about or I'd is
necessarily be changed by this
but I do think that adopt that
passing this bill.
Does open up a whole lot of
other potential issues
especially around tort claims
support tax claims and.
And I just have a real real
concern with.
With folks being given this
authority.
Without that the same kind of
training that we expect of every
other law enforcement officer
who would be who would be doing
taking similar actions so I I
can't support the bill because
of that although I I appreciate
your.
Your your times in madam chair I
think either of these Jamaicans
speak to who's responsible I
mean I think it's it's been
pretty clear as to just with my
experience with the mounted
patrol in Travis county so maybe
they could speak a little
further to that as to when
they're they're not allowed to
just go out and make an arrest
in there either with a state
police officer Travis county
sheriff's deputy for a police
officer
and that's how they operate as
as an assistant to those in
those situations but they can
speak further about that and
then I I would like to hear that
I will say that that some of the
language here says that I
understand that might be the
practices that they're going out
there with them but the language
here doesn't require that it
just says that they they
requested assistance
And so yes Sir.
Were we able to get chief very
on the zoom just chair I'm here
can you hear me yes we can hear
you.
So to speak to the request for
this this legislation was
introduced in two twenty twenty
one and all this does is allow
for the definition of law
enforcement to be consistent
across all states statutes to
address your concern about
training our economy is three
hundred hours we use the exact
same stuff that they use at the
full time academy in Santa Fe or
the satellite academies like in
Hobbs we have the same her
points we have the same hand
outs with the same section yes
we require our applicants to go
through the same physical
fitness test when they re enter
into our cabinet and all of our
training is done by instructors
who are recognized by New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy as guest
lecturers in general policing
firearms instructors and and
defensive tactics instructors as
far as the tort claims in the
funding we have had funding from
the state of New Mexico for the
past three years hitting the
general appropriations bill it's
right at ninety five thousand
dollars to cover tort claims in
professional liability and then
your asking about this I believe
the Civil Rights training.
So I correct.
On Mr chair Mr Gramm are I'm
sorry chief chief very I think
that I'm I'm referring to are
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
under which when you have a
claim against a law enforcement
officer you have to give notice
to the public body hi and it is
is I think that there will be
folks who might have claimed
that are seeking to give notice
to there it is not clear who
they would give notice to with
these changes.
Notice what initially go to the
requesting agency this these
changes as far as depth included
on the definition of our.
Do not allow us to go out and
just do our own thing we still
have to be requested by an
agency but there are smaller
agencies such into their
consequences Missy Act where
sometimes they have requested
our assistance because they only
have one officer who's working
for them and so to R. troopers
are out working.
Under the request of the smaller
agency and it's just them
together and so they need to be
able to we have officers that
have come across D. W. Eisele
been called to domestic violence
and they need to be able to take
action at that time and not wait
until a full time officers
attention to be called that and
show up on C. R. our statute has
been in place since nineteen
forty one twenty nine dash six
yes I says that when we are
requests by any agency we have
the full power of the agency
that request is there
jurisdictions there us power
we're just trying to make sure
that there is consistency across
all states statutes in regards
to the definition of law
enforcers.
And Mr chair at that thank you
to Sarah and I I hear what
you're saying there I don't see
you know what you're saying
reflected in language of this
bill so that that's where my
concern comes from I hear that
you're saying the the the notice
would go to this the requesting
agency we don't have that here
in fact we don't even have we
don't have and an adjustment to
that the definition of law
enforcement officer made to our
Civil Rights Act in this bill I.
I I understand the intent of
this bill and and in support of
of the intent I don't think the
language that's in front of us
addresses all all of the issues
so and and I think it could I
think without changing how this
bill the the intent of the bill
at all but but I don't think it
does right now.
Any additional discussion on the
bill.
Right we're on the I do passed
motions Senator Ivey Soto.
As amended thank you
No yes so I just.
At the and I'm concerned that
we've got a concept here that's
fixable but it's not.
Six ranked.
So I mean it's I don't wanna.
To me like it would be better
to.
Take a step that voting is.
Or that and moving it out and
then having a find a fix it on
the floor to me goes through
finance I mean I'm just
wondering again this research I
don't want to get in in the way
of how you run the committee but
this this does seem to me to be
one that I think the point the
center doing are are raising are
compelling to me but I also this
is an important bill I mean I
get I get why you're bringing
the bill it just seems like this
is something where if the
language on the site we could
have a product this good coming
out of here.
This is the operative so I'm
just throwing that out.
And Mister chair Senators I
guess I'll ask you I is this
something that.
Would be willing to we could we
could roll and and work on a bit
more and and bring back to the
committee and that's alright
with you Mr.
Yes Senator think that probably
is the wisest thing because I
agree with senator Wirth and I
grew Senator do it.
We have difficulty is present
form in and of related to the
Supreme trying to craft built
these committees and whether we
can avoid it so I think the the
better approach to be reprinted
in the building for the some of
the input Representative is
working with the staff in a
couple Sanchez to take our road
to future meeting probably next
week.
That's acceptable for you I I
through the thinking that it's
helpful to define the New Mexico
motor patrols in the context of
the log and there is a liability
this is always is this kind of
question not just in the area
with a lot of other volunteer
positions volunteer firefighters
of the.
So the subject to tort claims
act protections and liabilities
I don't know so I think I think
it's good that you're trying to
put these folks in the category
but but there are some
legitimate concerns I think
about the level of retraining so
that's my suggestion you
centers.
And madam chair if we could just
probably set up for Friday give
ourselves plenty of time it's
still early in the session and I
don't foresee this if we get it
fixed here on for State Land
Rover boxer or push back in
other committees so that we we
get it right I think Friday's of
better days were not Russian it.
Will of will postpone action on
the bill to thrive events and
picked thank thank you madam
chair thank you.
Senator Ingle.
No.
To.
the only Santo Domingo Senator
Ingle so we the Senator Baca
center box in the sixty five.
I think.
Through.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I have a for your
consideration Senate bill sixty
five public health order.
You will this bill what has been
introduced before it went
through this committee with
overwhelming support as well as
a
health and public affairs where
it went to the floor and later
died for no reason at.
But a I just want to reiterate
this this bill this bill
essentially what it does is it
allows a roll of it allows
essentially review of the public
health order under certain
conditions this it allows for
ninety days for health order to
stay in effect as issued by the
executive and and upon the
expiration of ninety days it
would it would either have to be
reviewed by the legislative body
if we're in session we would
simply do a major or or majority
vote on the on the health order
otherwise it would be it given
to let's council where it would
be reviewed by a portion of our
members and it would be voted on
at that point and that would I
want I want to reiterate to this
isn't really a Democrat
Republican issue this is a
legislative and executive issue
this simply gives the body a
time to put more eyes on the
problem Mr chair rather then the
singular individual whether
Democrat or Republican looking
at that health order in making
the decisions that are really
expanded cross the whole state
and COS states that we are only
one of a for instance NCSL
states we're only one of a dozen
states are so that has no
legislative review or any
provided input in these types of
health orders.
Senate bill sixty five would
also
It would it would it is it it
had does have an emergency
declaration so it would start
immediately.
And with that I have Senator
Gallegos here who is also co
sponsored the bill not allow him
to have a few words if he sees
fit.
Mr chairman committee appreciate
sorry I was in another committee
chair back at our time get now
we just want to be able have my
constituents and.
My part of the state was just
understanding the we didn't have
any voice the.
Also this this gives us an
opportunity to.
has legislators come together
that point candidates the agency
sorry.
Then you guys would not on
council this council have chance
to visit with governor on.
The issues are us hand in gives
us of we had amended.
And I think it's a better bill
we're just grateful the.
Here before you stand for any
question I want to make a point
one thing if I might Mr chair on
this bill is not identical to
what we saw last time it was
amended in health of public
affairs to extend that deadline
for forty five days to ninety I
I think it was a good amendment
it really allows for a little
more autonomy within the
executive to be able to make
these decisions that they have
to do and as we saw through the
last pandemic really let the
results of a decision settle in
before making a rash decision
whether to amend or to renew on
our par on the Legislative far
of it it grants more authority
to the executive in that way
that was offered by a doctor
Hickey with further amendments
in the previous iteration that
were entered in by Senator
sporty's E. PO I think what we
have in front of you here's a
truly bipartisan bill.
And with that I'll leave it to
Mr chair.
We didn't have anyone registered
in support or opposition so
we'll go to members of the
committee with questions.
Committee members questions
question which is our pledge of
the committee.
We want
to Moores with a do pass.
Senator do it question on.
Yet Mr chair Senators.
You know I.
General I anytime we can.
We have a very unequal
branches of government here and
we are by far the weakest and so
any time in general I I like
things that empower our
legislative branch but as a
practical matter.
The the late late McKinley was
on page two.
The health orders will not be
renewed or amended.
Nor shall new order be issued
for the same subject matter
except I joined legislation of
legislature so we're saying that
we.
We're just going to we're going
to be called in to potentially
multiple special sessions
multiple Turner sessions if
assuming that they we have
health orders that need to be
extended beyond this ninety days
depending on when this I and.
And I think there's probably
gonna be a lot of common sense
times when.
The governor should have any
governor should have the
flexibility to respond to that
one hope that if you sure let
let me finish my thought Senator
You know there are a lot I know
folks did not like what happened
during the COVID but frankly.
We don't know what future
emergency situations might be
coming are we don't know if
we're gonna be in a position to
be calling ourselves and every
ninety days if need be
I think this takes away
important flexibility that.
That the executive should have
in an emergency situation
and and some of the other
language in this I really like
that you know.
The language on page four
subsection C. I.
I like that all the language
that.
That is keeping.
The legislature.
More involved in these
situations without without
timing a governor's hands in a
situation that we can might not
be able to anticipate that level
flexibility might be pretty
critical to the citizens of New
Mexico so I I can't support this
because of that but but please
please go ahead respond sure
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and senator do week
I'm glad you like what's on page
four because I think I'm gonna
leave you ate some of your
concerns with special sessions
and all that sort of thing if if
you look on page two in and
around line thirteen through
seventeen it it talks about the
joint resolution while we're in
session so we're only going to
take a majority vote if we
happen to be in session in the
event that were not in session
it gets the the decision gets
kicked over essentially eight
council of which were each of us
have members and that would vote
on it at that time so there
would not be a special session
let's Council could fully
operate and function within our
part time legislature so I think
with this it kind of works for
lack of a better word and all of
our the good words chair at the
good chairs work here eloquently
within the structure of our part
time legislature by allowing
that flexibility and allowing
the governor to do what they
need to do in a time of
emergency.
And Mr center at I appreciate
that I'm.
I'm thinking of the situation
that we can't anticipate where
we're not for eight council to
to be called into session to to
deal with something like this
and I I don't know what that
would be but I am very hesitant
to make changes to our statutes
that specifically address these
kinds of emergency situations.
That that are limiting in that
way because.
I can imagine all sorts of
terrible things happening that
would preclude the ability for
us to act on this and then and
then
hands are tied for for keeping
the citizens of New Mexico state
I certainly can't think of one
that that happened already some
of the the other point that I
would make is that let's council
meets monthly and we did so
during the pandemic we met my
soon to vote
And and and and so I would see I
would see that we could meet we
didn't need.
Mr chair Senator I'm on that
council we don't we don't meet
monthly
could meet like maybe three or
four times a year and then right
when we start the session
but I'm not talking about just a
comment like situation I'm
talking about.
Other potential emergency
situations that that honestly I
I I I don't even know what they
would be specifically but
because I I think in general
shows have as much flexibility
as we can when dealing with my
emergency situations
and so I I I can't support this
bill
thank you senator for the
Mattoon.
Other comments questions.
Subzero Mr chair I I do have a
so basically the madam chair I
understand so ninety days after
the governor issued a public
health order.
Then.
Basically the governor look no
longer so no longer can issue a
new order it's basically to move
to us at that point it would
move to us to either approve it
Mr chair Senator or if the
governor decided to amended in
some way which is what we saw
this last time under under
Corona virus nineteen were the
health order was initially put
out and then it was amended
from time to time for various
different reasons so so whether
if if she wanted to renew it
would be on us at that point Mr
Mr chairman of our it says page
two line thirteen
cannot be renewed by the
governor or amended nor a new
order issued for the same
subject matter.
That's correct so Mr chair so
basically.
For COVID the governor has
ninety days and then the
governor's done and basically
it's up to us as to what we do
is that what is being yes at
that point we would have to come
to legislative body in the
legislative body Mr chair would
would give their input on either
of on an up and down vote
whether we're in session or
through a lex Council Mr and I
know we're having a big
discussion during the session
about.
A professional legislature
And again I I'm trying to think
of someone who sits on the
Legislative Council.
Am I going to be in a position
to be making public health
orders.
Setting aside my law practice in
walking over and turning on the
zoom
Again that's what this this does
and I get that I just it does it
does make me certainly pause and
I do think it's a for the Santa
and all state it's I commend our
governor for what she did
through this COVID crisis and I
know there's differences of
opinion
and I just think.
Given that we were in completely
uncharted waters.
The idea that.
That on top of everything else
that the administration was
trying to do to navigate.
Especially during the and the
the initial window free vaccine
for example that.
The administration would then
have to plan
the legislature to say we still
think this needs to move
forward.
You know I get I get the
separation of powers and the
need to have the legislature
involved in those decisions but
I'm just I'm having a little bit
of a struggle with with the
Legislature then becoming.
Basically the entity that's
going to call.
Each successive.
Order.
Once the first ninety days is
and and I would point out Mister
chair and and senator that we're
not issuing orders so we have no
authority to issue the order at
this point it would be a matter
of just renewing the order so we
would take a vote whether to
renew the order that was given
for the war a new order would be
submitted with an amendment
and that and that would be
considered at that point so at
no point would be we do a
decision making body on public
health policy I would point out
however the role of the
legislature Mr chair is is we we
submit opinions on a variety of
issues and I understand this
one's a little bit different and
that this is a in a time of
crisis but at but at the same
time it gives nearly a quarter
of the year for us to digest in
ascertain what the situation is
and hopefully this would
initiate some sort of dialogue
between the executive and the
legislature where we could come
to a consensus that I think is a
none of us were to our were
doctors that are sitting here
none of which doctors executive
as well as it is not a doctor
I think that more heads are are
better than one and smarter
decisions are made when more
voices are involved in that's
kind of what this bill does
thank you Mr chairman I guess
I'm still the way I read page
two line nine section B. is that
just.
And I know it's been amended in
ninety days or ninety days after
an order and let me just read
and public health order some of
the requirements subsection a
shall automatically terminate
ninety days after being issued
and shall not be renewed or
amended nor showing new order be
issued for the same subject
matter except by joint
resolution of the legislature
for the council so basically
this is basically saying that
that the executive branch is now
done it's coming to us we issue
we would have to come in and
issue successive orders.
and and Mr chair and and senator
that that to me it doesn't read
that way what what it says is
that to renew if we could
approve it so it's more it's not
necessarily an issuance of an
order it is an approval of an
order given so the executive
would have to issue the order
and then we would renew it for
she amends it and we accept and
that one would go ninety days
and we would we would approve
that again if they wanted to
just continue that way that yeah
I just again Mr chair and I
appreciate I appreciate that
I have some reservations as well
about this having what we've
been been through and I think
the point Senator Duhigg makes
about.
Not really understanding what
happens.
You know if there's a public
health order that wipes out half
the legislature then what the
heck happens.
And so I just think that there's
enough.
Questions here that I I just
have concerns thank you Mr use
others the committee Sir Moores
thank you Mr Stewart thank you
just text messages people trying
to make public comment you want
to included in the so.
Senator seizure.
Some point to apartment goes
public comments but
I guess I in my mic much also my
calls on those side is this is
an and the product passed.
Pandemic you know quite frankly
you can argue with how she
handled it helps or not but
ultimately the decision as far
selection and they approved the
wage analyze pandemic so it's
all the this conversation in
order to hear obviously you guys
know my background mechanism the
faction or on that issue either
but I did I I do think her
responses would have been better
when you evaluated do Act after
action if she had to talk to us
as we since we were part of our
decisions all time and that's
the way that our our Republic is
supposed to work and you know I
I took a long long time with my
my colleagues that you guys
probably would've been as happy
as a governor's response of the
previous governor had been it
the chief executive of during
the pandemic with that
unfettered power so I I I'm not
indicting the the the court
current governor citing debate
about the last time to make it
is the the bait about the role
of this legislature in the next
pandemic because there will be
another one they usually come
every hundred years historically
the next one will probably be
twenty twenty five thirty years
with the the globalization of
the of the world and it's about
the rules that are not probably
not even our successes but
success and success is having
the next pandemic and a
nonpartisan way with the
Legislative verses the executive
branch and I think look at
previous governors and and a bit
of some people that you guys
would want to have that
unfettered power those times
and probably in the recent past
and so that I I just encourage
you not to look as an indictment
of the past pandemic or
evaluation of our performance in
this it is about.
What role this legislature has
contracted and the actual not so
sure.
This was a.
Thank you Mr chair and I'll just
say that.
The New Mexico senator Morris
you know I think we will have
our differences of opinion on
certain issues with with the
last health orders but you know
I think what's important here is
how many of my business owners
my constituents didn't
understand why I couldn't do
more why couldn't stand up for
them or why I couldn't even have
a sit down
and you know I don't think
that's good government where
we're elected from one hundred
twelve unique districts with
very unique business interest
with unique constituents that
all have a very specific needs
and what this essentially will
do is just force and up front
meeting where we can bring those
needs those desires those wants
to the forefront to the
governor's office and make sure
that that Here she understands
exactly what every specific area
needs
we've got maybe I was this that
there's just certain people
giving advice and that's part of
the executive but what makes the
legislature so unique and so
interesting is you have one
hundred twelve unique
backgrounds thought process is
not one of us in here thinks the
same we all have different past
experiences that make us think
of different things have
different ideas and when that's
loss I think that's what gives
the people or or causes them to
lose hope and feel as they're
not being heard so hopefully
that's one reason to to move
this forward is is they'll have
better representation because
they do have our cell phone
numbers within our district they
can make those phone calls and
have their voices heard thank
you.
No one else
so have a last few comments for
those who are puzzled about the
procedures of the committee I
think they're published online
there on the website they were
made available to beginning of
the session over the last couple
years to respect the demands of
the session and on the all the
members I try to coordinate the
meeting by having idea going
into training how how many
speakers wish to speak and how
for what occurred sometime they
may wish to speak so I can
manage this committee in terms
of time so we we do that for
that reason I'm sure we can
realize we just let anybody pop
in and and that will
imprisonment they wish there's
no control whatsoever you have
chaos and I don't run the
committee that way
the of the four I think appoints
a pretty well maybe I I though
would add a couple more with a
little more specificity I think
I think there is a an issue here
Senator and you know I commend
you for raising the issue that I
have a different solution you do
all come to that the M. but but
One of things is certainly going
to be a subject of litigation
and you and I've been in
disputes with the governor you
and I are standing up for the
legislative branch in front of
the Supreme Court and been
successful in that regard
defending the legislative role
and I you know please that you
and I did that work together but
the but of the issue here for me
is the language that relates the
refers to a new public emergency
on the same subject matter than
it the new subject matter is
gonna be an issue litigated rate
in other words the the
prohibition here's you can't
have a recurring executive order
long saying executive order on
the same subject matter well
who's going to say whether the
same subject matter
it was it was the decision to
for example in my part of the
state make of it unlawful to go
to Walmart which is what the
executive branch did they shut
down you know week week of
thanksgiving shut down access to
grocery stores in Los crucis it
was it was evident maybe of of.
In order they didn't have a lot
of thought because all that
really did as a regional offices
drove to a passive to do the
your thanksgiving shopping in a
state that had almost no
restrictions no masking almost
unlimited and and then go to a
pass to do grocery shopping
where you could go to Walmart
and Sam's club and come back
twenty minutes later to Los
crucis and then of course then
the then the orders at the same
time so that anytime you leave
the state you had a party member
that that order was at the same
time so in my district we leave
the state three or four five
times a day and especially when
you've closed on the grocery
stores we go to pass so we leave
the state and what really
happens is that the public just
learns to think more the
executive and so ignore the
executors that's frankly what
happened I mean that that that's
reality might my daughter was
living in Roswell at the time of
of some of this and she she
reported back to dash said that
I'm I'm working Russell we're
nobody's wearing masks and
everybody's wearing sidearms
but.
and then you know it's it's
funny but it's not really funny
and that was my observation of
what was going on is different
communities just decided how
much they wanted to obey the
executive orders he compares
Santa Fe everything was shut
down I mean all the stores are
with everything public business
were shut down come to my part
of the state or you're part of
the state you know or father to
complete north right and so the
issue here is then then you know
the order should not be read on
the same subject matter that's
going to the question is it is a
shutdown of grocery stores are
shut down churches as it.
What is what is the order and
ask me the same I think I'll
probably be the subject of
dispute and probably litigation
between the executive branch and
the legislative branch I have
some questions this probably
would be on the subject that we
have time for today I have a
real question whether they would
be constitutional to allow
Legislative Council to
essentially act as a star
chamber these at twice today
already the tribe of but but
it's but essentially that's with
what it sort of looks like to me
is that you know if you the
legislature's in session there's
one Avenue but the legislature
is not in session then let's
council gets to be sexually of
super legislature right and have
a a lawmaking role effectively
with a limited number of members
and maybe not a balanced
representation on a one person
one vote and population basis or
seven think there could be some
real constitutional issues I I
would certainly expect a of
executive to challenge those or
other legislation challenges so
those are those the kind of
concerns I think I have enough
in the big picture.
The that I told you but again
that I think you've identified
an issue that that is something
we should be talking about I the
solution I have is one that I've
advocated for now two or three
years it should be much easier
for us to call ourselves into
session.
for example we're always hearing
even this hearing.
We need to modernize Our Lady.
We need to modernize our
legislature right it's always
entry for me because I
Representative district that
borders Texas and we say well
we're the last unpaid
legislature well sort of you New
Hampshire pays our legislature
hundred dollars a year with no
per diem so yeah they get paid
would you take their deal I I I.
Texas pays their legislature's
seventy five hundred dollars a
year and in in on paper they
meet every other year much like
we used to but they call
themselves into special session
all the time and and regularly
so you know we should be talking
about the alternative
monetization I'm and I think the
solution to this issue Senator
would be and what of impressed
call ourselves in the session
more easily during the
circumstances and not have to
sit here and and and make it a
battle between the legislature
and the and the governor in the
press and I think that calling
ourselves and session down would
have allowed us to debate
discuss evaluate and act as a
check or balance on the
executive branch of that was
appropriate under the
circumstances so I'm I'm not
gonna support the bill because I
share the concerns of Senate do
gonna things are worth there are
no they're very well with the
old Rumsfeld line there's no no
and known unknowns and I'm
concerned about the unknown
unknowns right which we we can't
anticipate all the circumstances
of the the executive or a health
crisis or other crisis might
might dictate but I think the
better solution would be for us
to be able to.
More actively operate as a
legislature's of the COVID
branch of government that means
be able to bring ourselves in
easier we tried I'm trying to
member who when when we had this
issue with the executive branch
over the federal money a number
of us try to bring ourselves
into session to address the
issue in that way and I think a
very thoughtful way to do it to
come in and meet with the exact
try result result that Fuhrman
with we couldn't get all the
signatures we need to do because
it takes again it up in a large
majority to be able to do that
kind of thing and it's hard it's
hard to coordinate to get
everybody around the state live
in different districts to sign
on and get into the position and
do it on time and in organizing
we we should we should.
Result that and so I will be
waiting for your bill but I
think you're addressing
important issues.
Mr chair I I might just respond
real briefly you know I I would
point out that that lets Council
we've we've ever dated or power
to them on many occasions one
would be
just a simple comment rules
within the building in whether
we're testing and masking other
issues involving security that
do affect the public coming in
here with the firearms or not
having firearms many occasions
we've given even of the
bureaucratic branch of of this
body the ability to regulate
those types of issues and and so
I I do agree with you I I I
think that would certainly be
one way to do it would be to to
be able Carl call ourselves into
the special session however this
body has just not had the will
to overcome that that threshold
without all close I think you
committee for your time Mr chair
thank you from the past motion
right yes as much as a
representative of still more on
the debate.
I apologize I got stuck in the
back of the foot.
I was just it is already been
discussed then just tell me and
I'll.
As we had on the vote but I'm
I'm just trying to figure out on
the bottom page for top of page
five.
What what what we have two
different standards.
Of a ninety day.
For members of those uses
basically for larger tropical
bility I got out for thirty days
for public health order not
subject to sub paragraph eight.
I'm just wondering if.
Instead of getting into a debate
about the ninety days with
thirty days if we should just
have to have a single standard
that would be the the ninety
days.
Mr Chairman open to amendment if
Senator has an idea.
So Mr chairman and survive what
is what is the distinction
between.
The.
The subparagraph day and the
subparagraph B. you know I think
the distinction is just a matter
of discretion and what people
are comfortable with and and
that's how those numbers were
selected we've moved several
times through this amendment
process and you're seeing a
result of of what has come with
from some actually bipartisan
amendments these are the numbers
generated through those.
Through compromise all state.
We strive.
Right I guess I guess to get by
my questions what is a public
health from the.
Not subject.
As part of a.
But with that the.
In order of general
applicability throughout the
state.
Or portion of the state that
closes any public place that's
paragraph the first for for what
would be Mr Chairman I'm trying
to think of an example for you
I'm not quite coming up with one
of the at the moment here okay
thank you for the forces are.
That's a.
I might my only concern with
legislation is is.
Is that I'm not sure I
understand that distinction as
well as at the station page
three.
Between parents program for
program I
And I believe the distinction is
like something for closing down
Mr chair like a restaurant in
case of a.
I don't know some food borne
illness.
This is the order of general
applicability which is more like
we saw during Corona virus.
I think it's right although it
does say.
Okay for like twenty two.
That closes in a public place.
But I do think is that Senator
Baca I.
I've supported this right I do
think you're on the right track.
Well I do think the legislature
needs to be involved.
might might my only concern is
that we're making this
distinction here and.
And I'm not sure.
Right click debate about what
the decision is and we see this
happen all the time right where
somebody says.
Well it's not a ninety day order
it's a thirty day order and I
can just keep renewing it as
many times I want to.
Because the thirty orders was
one ninety or so it's.
Right and then and then we talk
about whether it's at thirty
order ninety or
and whatnot.
I'm an example of that might be
the like the masking that
affected the whole state.
As being example so that would
be Mr Chairman.
I'm sorry about that that would
be though.
A thirty day order which she
could renew as many times you
want to write because that
masking does not.
Does not just by itself.
Not close the public place and
it does not limit the government
people.
New Mexico.
The
was like like I said it's it's
it's that are and I'm trying to
look for trends brought.
I'm.
Sir.
My recollection was last year
you just have to clean ninety
days.
And we have the legislature
there there was no changes to to
this other than the forty five
days going out to ninety days Mr
chair and senator the thirty
days was always in there okay
got it.
Okay thank you thank you Senator
Wirth
where are we where are we on
this world there is a pending
two passed motion as amended
from senator Morris so I make a
subsidy most.
The motion to table in order
takes precedence on this panel
called police Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Course the center when you yes.
Senator Pirtle no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator yes
Senator modus yes the notify
before your billing statements
and.
Thank you committee thank you.
Senator Ingle we have two bills
on our agenda to be finished by
today we were scheduled to be
done by six I think we're gonna
make that just provide this to
send three eighteen judicial
retirement solvency first this
is a simple appropriation bill
centering on sentry to.
Seven this is the cleanup is
just appropriation bill and so.
If you have any registered to
speak.
Senator about five minutes to
support your bill Mr chair that
what I meant for last with
Mr chair members of the
committee what Senate Bill
creating dozens of you know and
all the snow here we have
several parts of our retirement
programs that are under funded.
And Miss Vigil retirement is one
of those in the future here here
grudges secretary para I asked
him to look up and two things he
thought maybe we could try to
correct with the excess dollars
we have and this particular bill
here for the judicial retirement
act appropriate twenty twenty
million one time appropriation I
think would certainly help that
he can go into the detail on
that and then also had one
Senate bill three seventeen is
for the magistrates and their
homes are they have both taken
some of our legislative funds
and use those to shore up
players and ours is a hundred
and thirty percent from the and
So late we help them out there
but with this kind of money
maybe we can go and pick some of
these to where they'll last
longer no yield either one of my
experts here go into that
further if you'd like them to
the majority of this or.
Our offices three eighteen.
The I tried.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Gregory with P. R.
A. Senator Ingle covered it I
will just state that the
unfunded liability of the
judicial retirement plan right
now is about to seventy three
million dollars so the twenty
million dollars appropriation
would help us pay down some that
unfunded liability of the funded
ratio right now is about sixty
one point eight percent of this
twenty million dollars
appropriation we estimate would
take us to seventy two percent
and also put us a funding in
funding period of twenty four
years it's currently a hundred
and six years it's gonna take
for the current contributions to
pay down the unfunded liability
of getting down to twenty four
years puts this within a twenty
five year period which is a best
practice for a pension funds to
be within to pay down unfunded
liability and happy to answer
any questions more specific that
may come up Mr chairman.
Yeah Sherman all answer any
questions that will help to the
US from.
It has been over the past Mr
Chairman is a two.
so Mister chairman I appreciate
what you're doing all the
actuaries that I've listened to
say just putting a little bit of
money and doesn't do anything it
makes us feel better what we
need is recurring dollars to
make sure this fund is solvent
so I and we can't put any of the
federal money and it strictly
says no because they get it you
can't just put money in and fix
the solvency you must have
dedicated resources so I I
appreciate what you're doing but
I can't support this I know I'm
in the minority it doesn't
matter nevertheless.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
just what Senator was going to
ask of us question this is not
increased the donations given by
either the state or the
employees judges so this is just
a one time drop in money that's
Senator was talking about but
that race in what people are
expected for this day for the
retirement so Mr chair Senator
experts white one not.
A difficult to fix the problems
so what Senator Stewart just
mentioned
the army this so you senator
Senator Stewart first.
Stuart Ingle Stuart you could
put all the junior my problem
over the years so why why.
Why are we fixing the problem of
school system money into it part
of.
We've tried to timer to.
Mr chairman and senator and this
that doesn't seem to the wings
are very short and this is a
opportunity I thought we could
sure the funds up that's about
all I could think we can do it
all here to the right of course
sure we have raised the
country's so called from the
state which have fifteen percent
of the judges which is kind of a
half but and that does come with
a special with the legislative
contribution which cluster of
these fiscal twenty five the
fund is making incremental
progress state one percent one
point two percent but it's only
was only half fund to put funds
in the last year of a difference
significant differences with
this the funds will continue to
no and I I consent to six years
this will allow you to get the
full funding hundred percent
funding in twenty four years
with a lot.
It's a I know it's a lot of but
it's a relatively modest
investment because this fund is
very small a hundred million
dollar phone.
Mr center RD so once you get to
hi percent twenty four years to
get that twenty million back
what happens when you go over
on.
Mr chair Senator Moores no the
judges keep intruding stations
this is the situation with the
legislative retirement fund
right the the contributions he
coming in from the oil and tax
for the gas tax you can change
it if you want to but I don't
think this happens on a terrible
thing but you can adjust the
state's contribution for example
when a phone is hi
Representative trending upward
and that looks like a projection
PR says will continue you can
modify the state constitution.
That's what I would suggest some
of the benefits of the given to
you whenever that day comes
investors as senator Wirth
sort of return we're introducing
the magistrates also but not the
main the main funds.
Where we are
Mr chairman and Senator Moores
you so yeah the the main power
fund is is much much larger in
in you you all passed a bill in
the twenty twenty that need you
know reduce some of the call
benefits and increase the
contributions over a six year
period were here three of that
contribution increase so those
those contributions are
recurring dollars and and that
will help larger pair of fund of
fruit for this funded it's much
smaller currently the the
liability incurred is about a
hundred eighty seven million
dollars of the assets we have on
account is a hundred and
fourteen million dollars so that
unfunded liabilities about
seventy three million so so
twenty million dollars
appropriation to this fund does
does give something for the book
Mr it's funny we're we're never
allowed to play in the budget in
this committee or any committee
out high and also select news to
me.
They're allowing us to test the
budget rules and Judiciary ever
so property reason how far
behind are we on the pair of
fun.
Debate for the refund.
Mr Chairman center Moores the
the unfunded liability in that
fund is about seven point two
billion
our funding period is fifty nine
years I will say before the
reform was passed in twenty
twenty that funding to have a
funding period it since has
increased to it was a hundred
and sixty years last year was
seventy two years and this year
it's fifty nine years so we are
making progress it's just it's
just so large it's going to take
take time to see these other
changes be implemented.
All structure to the committee
questions Representative.
Thank you of this Mr get out of
the.
This was my only transfer sports
is not alone.
Hello Sir.
But you know are.
I recognize the responsibility
to but also recognize that this
is what happens frankly.
But it's a state funded.
It's supposed to be.
Since the state based on the
country.
We have this.
Three years ago with the
unemployment fund.
Suppose we the state is also
stating based on contributions.
And in the.
We talked about the other
chairman funds as well but I
mean we we.
But we we create these funds and
there's what we say
Representative is also stating.
And.
And then we end up.
Have an update.
Up your taxpayer dollars.
To to build about.
When even when there's you know
the the structure of the fund is
that it's supposed to be.
Funded by the users.
And both employers and
employees.
And you know it is.
Frankly it.
I mean it's a it's a problem
need to figure out the right
level we need a plan.
We're not put in this position
because it is.
Frankly we are well I recognize
at the moment we have.
The money although every time we
say we have the money probably.
Equal so if you're at all of the
calls four times what we
actually have right but it is it
is something that
But this this this twenty
million dollars that isn't going
to go to generals services that
government is best provided.
The in order to develop a plan
that was supposed to self the
state.
And.
Twenty million dollars it took a
change.
So it's it is
I recognize.
We did this so that create this
problem.
The way we contributed to it.
But.
But it is it's a it's a real
problem that we end up having
developed.
So thank you madam chair.
Additional discussion from
committee.
I think we're probably raise to
go vote.
The old tunes.
Congestion.
Which
is called wall.
The thing of it is we have.
For the for under funding
there's a damn good where those
start that you do I I mean
motion to explore the for.
Yeah but we are.
What it
you for.
You for come.
Yes I know he he wanted to get
some Representative have to.
Eight to fifteen.
Changes and then in the meantime
just to feel that they're all
also a center I I I agree with
you that we have we have this
extra money to good idea to to
bolster.
I don't I don't Mr like to where
it was but the thing that is we
have a constitutional obligation
to fund these we started the
judge's retirement they didn't
pay enough in we've increased
their salaries and things over
the years have it it's beginning
to try to kind of catch up a
little bit but you know this is
a chance I hope to make a couple
of retirement stable and
you know when I did the
legislative one I had done some
research with some tax folks of
how much money we could get if
we just had the people collect
the tax that was due to the
state because we weren't
collecting.
On the other state rodeo.
We were not doing that and all I
did was just password pass a
bill where they had to collect
that the guy right now check had
to submit that to the state
never brought in less than
twenty three million.
Road fifty seven year so it's a.
I was just a chance to hopefully
make some of these a little more
stable.
Thank you center surrounded do
pass motion.
That over to the chair thank you
madam chair so I just want to
add this is maybe not directly
related to the subject but I
think it's close enough one is
the opportunity.
To bring up something I've
talked a little bit with the
missed happen in the Chief
Justice and judiciary which is I
I think we have to go.
Right of it further than you're
gonna hear center think you're
hearing a little bit of that
here in New and maybe what I'm
gonna proposed now will lease
the short term compound the
issue of insolvency but I think
it's an important one
nonetheless and and that is that
I'd like to see this committee
as a Judiciary Committee try to
come up with a way that we we
develop a retirement.
Program for judges which would
encourage people to take the
bench later in their lives and
their careers.
Right now all all look at the
individuals here to try to get
some information about it but
you know we're getting are the
judges people to be seated that
these days are in their thirties
or forties or public defenders
and district attorneys
they're coming to the bench
right frankly.
In many cases very experience
for what I do is a civil
practitioners and and handling
complex litigation.
I'd love to see retirement plan
Senator Stewart the judge
certainly have no intention ever
that take the budget be a
terrible judge I can tell you
that much but but but you know
it may be good for somebody
who's sixty years old the state
I've reached the pinnacle of my
career I put in the good years
of service I've been able to to
take care of my family and and
of and then give that service
the last five years on the bench
and.
We ought to be finding a way to
attract seasoned in older
practitioners and really our our
retirement plan does not
incentivize at all it takes too
long to vest
and and the budget don't really
act as an incentive for anybody
to do that but but this is one
of those rare circumstances
where one size doesn't fit all
into this notion that the
retirement should be one one
perspective and you do your
twenty years you do here twenty
five years and you get to
retirement this is one of those
circumstances where I I'm gonna
tell you have item of the season
a male or female judge with
twenty five years of age thirty
years on bench is exactly who
you do want to sit on the bench
in many cases we just don't have
that happen.
And I think that's too bad I
know that's not your bills but I
remember my first year of here
we passed a bill to reach for
judges wouldn't have to
necessarily run for office use
retention we would get older
judges and things like that to
do that and work well remember
that very well it's funny you
mention that because that was
come along your way there
etcetera I mean I grew that
hasn't worked either I mean that
was what I was told of the as of
the guy here thirty six years
old whenever and in doing that
judges anyway but all the guys
over there says this will really
help a lot good we get to folks
in our later years to go ahead
and take a judgeship and not
have to run for office this will
follow and another did you play
football Center.
No I grew up in the pool okay
well.
Well I I I sat on the bench a
lot don't make you made our one
make it sound better than it was
but you know you you would have
never thought center Moores
plain football you never thought
of not watching the game film
the day after the game to see
who Mr block and and who and who
not you never you.
Yeah but but you know that
there's a good learning
experience from that in you
bring up a good point I can't
tell you in the time I've been
here you've been here a bit
longer me how many times we say
if we do X. Y. will be the
result and we never really take
the time to acknowledge that why
didn't happen as a result of
acts and we never take the time
to really study that issue so
you're right I know that when
the the new system for looking
judges was enacted Phillip when
the member the year on that two
can you tell me that we we
talked about before with thirty.
The lady I just.
Twenty five or thirty years ago
right a five race sexual first
year yeah I'm I'm looking at all
the not so twenty five thirty
years ago you know you think
that maybe after twenty five or
thirty years would sit there go
you know did this work and if in
years in your head no and I
really it didn't it didn't
produce all of the results we
thought it would so it's too bad
at it it's taken us this long
etcetera but but no time like
now to do it so I assure you
we've been talking about that
issue and we're way off the mark
of your bill but we were looking
at that and we're gonna
valuation why that didn't work
in maybe there's a much better
way to do it but for now on the
subject of your bill.
We we've got to make this of
small progress despite the fact
that I heard a knowledge my
colleague saying this is not
really going to do much to argue
that either to get their health
but it's something but I but I
hope you and I and the other
members the committee to will
think of the idea of how to how
do we get somebody with
experience on the bench in the
idea that they'll see a
retirement as a result of that
in see this is maybe a unique
circumstances they're they're
not like a firefighter who you
want to get twenty years or or
teacher twenty or twenty five
years of work from them before
they are eligible for
retirement.
So this for your bill what I I
want to have a start thinking
about maybe some of the other
related issues and and maybe a
better picture of the judiciary
in our state and how we can
really look back at twenty five
or thirty years and and re
evaluate reassess.
All right do we have in the past
motion on the other room yes or
run to pass.
The any of the new has motion
Senator Senator Ivey Soto to be
charming and senator Morris
his nose and others in support
looks like you've got to do
passed by my count Senator
Sherman Committee.
The
last bill for the day.
Regional water project
procurement Senator Ingle Senate
bill two hundred last till
today.
Do we have anybody registered
the committee this bill
basically the title basically
claims entire bills providing an
exemption from the procurement
code for multi term contracts
for professional services that
involve regional water projects
not only to and state right now
that are pending at all pending
that's the new water project and
the Navajo McKinley County
project and they have to be an
estimated cost of more than five
hundred million which is is and
this would just let them to
contracts with the approval of
the DFA going to be on there for
longer than four years.
Because current limitation on
contractors for years to come
station so I am an expert here
Joe Thompson and he will be glad
to answer any technical
questions for you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Joe Thompson registered
lobbyists for the eastern New
Mexico rural water utility
authority and buying
administration bureau of
reclamation put a billion
dollars out for the six rural
water projects across the United
States and it was sort of a race
last year to see who can get
money and to get it matched up
the fastest in New Mexico was by
far the fastest so last year the
governor and the legislature
came up with thirty the water
trust board came up with fifteen
million as a result of that we
generated all I think a hundred
seventy million match from the
feds so now we find ourselves in
a situation where we expect to
do very well this year as well
but we're two years into the
contract so we're letting you
know we have twenty five
separate components of this
water project out images would
be.
It would be really hard if we
had to go out and re procure the
engineering services right in
the middle of this construction
all these faces mall stand for
questions thank you we didn't
have anyone registered to speak
in opposition so we'll go to
questions from members of the
committee.
Questions Senator Ivey Soto.
So I think Mr and with us but I
think we have a syntax problem.
If you if you read page three it
is unclear.
What with an estimated cost of
more than five hundred million
dollars modifies.
It could modify.
Regional water project but could
also modify.
The design engineering of a
state public works project.
Yes Mr Chairman Senator Ivey
Soto I would say definitely
modifies.
The state public works project
or regional water project with
an estimated cost.
And you have that.
The end but.
Yeah I don't see it.
So Mister what so precisely we
need to set a definite modifies
you started with the state
public works project.
Which is the right so so you're
you're fact reading of the
modifies both as opposed to
modifying just the latter.
And
And so.
I just I just think that.
With the clarify the the Senate
tax if you don't mean that to
apply also to.
That is an injury of a state
public works project.
Mr chairman and we're Senator
Ivey Soto when we were looking
at drawing the the legislation
working with council service we
wanted to be as limiting as
possible.
to avoid resistance.
I'm not aware of any state
public works projects that are
more than that either but Hey.
I guess I understand what you're
saying so Mister if I could I
just suggest we just flip the
order how about adding a common.
Income.
Thanks after the word project a
line twelve.
If that would that would make
the chairman have at this moment
because it doesn't that doesn't
that create the destructive that
you're concerned about.
It should yes actually I'll I'll
I'll defer for a moment to
Senator Stewart for her to be
not.
Back in the house days that the
former house judiciary chairman
LFC on it you know we should
look for what we would call the
elegant fix if you can add a
comma to solve a problem that
was you get bonus points for our
in our house Judiciary jeopardy
right from the system it it's a
little different over here in
the Senate here you get points
for adding pages of additional
version Tax but back then you
know one comma one apostrophe
board that was I just added two
words earlier today I was good
those of those are big points
applicants will yeah let's let's
go to cap.
Senator thanks not no.
When we.
There.
Mr chairman I thought to just
put it in a number set seven
eighteen are you trying to
modify the services related to
the design and engineering of
the state public works project.
Are you trying to modify that or
are you just adding that it a
regional water project with
estimated costs more than five
hundred million dollars what
we're doing but yes so we want
not to status as members of.
Mister chairman Senator Stewart
that would be great.
Because when when we were
working with the drafter we
wanted to create as little
resistance as possible for it so
the.
If you're projects that would
qualify would seem to accomplish
that so thank you Mr let me at
the the concern I have is if you
just add if you break the new
languages new paragraph seven
you still have those following
subparagraphs a and B. Richard
existing tax which are intended
to be I think part of
subprograms six and seven so I
think if you break that in the
seven year creating an issue
there or or or you let them out
of the we we have then you lose
lots of points that way because
you're using redundant language
words on this or to do so yeah
but anyway that's the concern I
have you're just adding part of
seven Senator but you can just
come if you want I I don't think
it does what you think that I go
ahead and fill to make yourself
feel better.
You know this committee is all
about making me feel better.
It's a special day so I'm open
any other suggestions I just I
just think the suggested
breaking that six and seven part
is not gonna work might sell but
the movie any other suggestions.
Maybe when once matter perhaps.
Mr Chairman
I would I would move that we.
a page three line twelve strike.
He underlined.
The page three between lines of
nineteen and twenty.
we insert.
Representative seven.
That then has that language plus
seventy.
Laid out again.
So that it would read.
Seven.
Regional water project with
estimated costs of the five
hundred million dollars a for
rate not to exceed the
Representative type project
completion and a subscript one
period and be part of the
secretary of finance
administration.
Than you take in a and B. away
from sex no sex of the living
yet again yeah yes let me want
you to be logged.
Done better suggestion to.
Well James is making a very good
observation which is if you were
doing with Senator Ivey Soto is
proposing to do.
you would need when you create
that new program seven you would
have to add the words services
relating to the design and
engineering as you do with the
preceding paragraph six.
That making sense at all.
You've got the.
Rhythm beginning on page two
separate B. which is services to
science services required to
services relating to those that
are and so reserve your program
seven will be services relating
to and then that new language
original water project Mr
chairman that that that
observation.
Clarifies that the more the just
because one of five hundred
dollars what in fact the what's
currently written apply to state
public works project so so we at
the end of that is not the
intent them then having seven
that's a services related to the
design engineering of a regional
water project with estimated
cost of with the in the right
out again.
Really keeps it clean.
for cleanliness.
Get
ready for the COVID.
Or we could just come in there
and do it depends.
Please.
Because of the but what Senator
doing it so eight.
All right I think the COVID is
okay I still think it doesn't do
what you want but I'm I'm tired
of trying to in New Mexico Sir
do if you won in.
No restrictions.
Senator Ivey Soto you have an
amendment to.
Which is I get to strike the
underlined part in six.
Lay it all out in seven.
Thanks for the services related
to design engineering of
regional water project with a
and B. and and that gets us
there you got to move the hand
off of line ten and move it down
to one nineteen.
That.
Cations our yes.
Houston with some.
I think so I think about it too
so we will work together what
are the okay yes right that's
the proposed amendment.
You can do that are you for the
call.
But we're on that we're in the
amendment has presented is there
any objection the adoption of
the.
Seeing none Madam drive really
right it was yes we look at no
other discussion.
But motion to do passed as
amended
any other discussion I I gave an
easy on the calm and center
every Sotos amendment because I
don't intend to vote for your
bill and to do the right to
oppose the amendment and and
then vote against the bill so
right can we have I think.
Having been an architect mail
for thirty years myself I'm a
big believer in competition in
design engineering construction
projects.
and I'm also a big believer in
opportunity.
And the American way.
And and the flies and capitalism
and found all of us all of the
apple I I believe in all of the
things up and you know I say
that time and she but not really
because what what happens when
you limit the opportunities for
for contracts you oftentimes
shut out the person who doesn't
have a chance to advance and so
and and I see that a lot of
construction I have of the
Representative a lot of
contractors bonding million
dollars but they can't one five
million dollars as of today with
with the way the contractor put
let out they can't move into
that next here up and to say
that really this is what we're
doing we're gonna live with the
people who are gonna provide
engineering services by by not
putting procurement out
for every four years right now I
have to go back every four years
here working so you don't have
to do that and so somebody's
going to get the nice big that
contract for a very long period
of time and that that maybe
efficient there's no doubt in my
mind it's more efficient more
cost effective and so forth but
I think it stifles competition
an opportunity and so I play
general don't impose these
initiatives but we're gonna do
passed motions are every so get
up Mr just one last thing that
is on page one line not level
of.
It says that this is provided an
exception from the procurement
code for multi term contracts is
actually providing in addition
to the procurement code for
multi term contracts.
Because we're adding to what can
be a multi term contract.
I would disagree Senator we look
on page two nine sixteen the
language is very specific this
is a list of exceptions to the
procurement.
Well it's it's kind of for for
professional services may not
exceed four years except for the
following it's an exception to
the four year.
It's not exception to having to
go under procurement.
All take whatever money you want
to propose center in the Sanchez
and the committee will act on it
like I said I because I'm not
supporting the idea conceptually
I don't think I should be.
I can do too much with.
The.
The the pithy language don't
doesn't come to the right now so
I'll just leave it but I will
point out that there's there's
an issue I think with that will
be passed motion as amended is
there any objection of.
Show me opposed all of those in
support we have to pass the
motion thank you very much I
think the work on the agenda for
today committee members please
again keep your calendar free
for tomorrow night at six
o'clock will be outside the
capital.
Look for disability there thank
you thank you one contractor
