this this and this about if I
S. on since our Senator sixes
six is been rolled over on I
don't know about anybody else
the committee but I know that
I've received quite a bit about
ridge on that bill it would be
helpful when the bill gets
produce either on Wednesday or
Friday or whatever it is I guess
rescheduled ought to know that
the that the sponsors of the
bill have met with the
apartments are of the bill
and of and for the miles and the
Given to do consideration
whatever that is in terms of
what the plans are okay good
always good advice center I
would settle for folks to try
and work through a narrow the
issues for us as much as they
can and in doing so those of you
to practice law particularly
know that when the parties to
work things out among themselves
they control the outcome
otherwise the it comes to us and
they may or may not like that
outcome.
The well they have control they
should exercise its the Senate
seventy one will be rolled over
as well.
and then we'll go to Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino before we begin
that let me also let everyone
who's on the call today in the
committee members a little bit
about discussion that I've had
with the Senate majority
leadership and with Senator
Pirtle as the ranking member of
this committee and I welcome
further discussion we're done
today from any other committee
members including other members
of the minority.
Historically all the twenty
years I've been here we've
always allowed a public to come
to our committee meetings come
into the room to the extent we
can fit them and try and and
allow for some public input
that process.
That's become very challenging
these days because of our remote
video conferencing as you all
know getting people to recognize
a connected on in order to so
forth the council challenge.
I like wise because it is
relatively easy for anyone to
join our committee from remote
locations with the cellphone or
device we get a lot more
interested people who want to be
heard and I appreciate the
public interest in doing that
but it's become untenable for us
to try and do that my experience
I know other committees and I've
tried to do so by recognizing as
many people as possible within
limiting the amount of time to a
minute minute a half maybe two
minutes for input.
My experience is it
unfortunately that means a rapid
fire hearing where we hear from
a lot of people for very short
periods of time but never really
get the bills sometimes the
meeting full time that it takes
to fully develop a good fought
full approach the legislation so
I'm I'm gonna try tried
something different for a period
of time we'll see how it works
which is first of all as we did
last week with the Senate bill
ten to encourage those of the
public who wish to assure their
comments are covered by this
committee they do so by sending
it to us in writing to the
mailbox so we've established for
that purpose and and the reason
doing so is that if you do it
that way you're you are sure
that the committee members all
have access to your email I'm
asking you to limit your words
to three hundred your comments
on any given bill
that again gives members the
opportunity to make sure that
they're really getting a chance
to read your comments and
understand and appreciate the do
so in advance when you do that
you also might send that email
in advance give me is the
committee chair and our staff
the opportunity really think
about your comments because we
get those in advance we can
incorporate those into our
analysis and give some thought
to the need for amendment or or
other considerations the bill by
by having the time rather than
getting them on the fly so I'm
asking the public to take
advantage of emailing your
thoughts and comments in advance
of our of our meeting and do so
at our committee a website in
our mailbox.
In the interview that the you
can be sure that you have public
input you have the chance to be
heard.
Apart from that might my plan is
also to.
When possible never possible to
have the proponents of the bill
the sponsor resent their bill in
ten minutes using whatever of
that time they wish to reserve
for rebuttal but then to present
their bill with their experts in
whatever witnesses they want to
have in advance of doing that
courage is the Sanchez to get us
your exhibit store your
documents to the committee in
advanced and allows us to to
again just another version of
this zoom conferencing.
I'm also advocating from this
point forward that if there is
opposition to a bill that the
opponents the bill do their best
to try and organize themselves
behind a spokesperson
spokesperson doesn't actually
have to the person who does the
speaking with that person
assumes responsibility for
coordinating the opposition to a
bill in deciding how much time
to allocate of the ten minutes
it all out rock musician twenty
one given speaker I'm hoping
that by asking them to organize
themselves we avoid redundancy
and also give them a meaningful
amount of time to really
identify issues that the
committee should consider rather
than try to just give everybody
one or two minutes to try and
and give a meaningful opposition
given the opposition a bill
cannot organize themselves
behind organized spokesperson
and and number of speakers a
presentation that will have to
resort to what we've been doing
before which is to take the the
ten minutes of opposition and
justify that among ten people
and give each other one minute
but from my experience so far
that's usually a very
effective way to spend a
meaningful amount of time
looking at a bill really trying
to identify issues for the
committee to consider some
that'll be our process I'm also
advocating individuals lobbyists
or others who were behind an
organization executive director
lobbyist in advance of the
committee and up to one hour
before hand that you of the
email the committee secretary
with your name of your
organization and your support or
opposition on a bill and then my
plan will be to read the names
of the organizations that
support or oppose any given bill
and as opposed to having to
transfer person and and then
just have them say that they
support propose a bill on behalf
of a given organization all of
that again challenges are are
zoom process and
in the logging down our system a
process so that's a but I'm
gonna like to adopt for the near
future we'll see see this
because as a matter of a
committee hearing.
Ultimately my goal is to try and
ensure that there's a lot of
time.
For this committee to exchange
and and the debate amongst
ourselves and to be a
deliberative body and to
oftentimes we're we're seven
were simply overwhelmed by the
public reasonable interest in
wanting to be heard participate
we're not allowing ourselves
that opportunity do the work in
the committee itself so for
those of those plans are clear
to everyone if not what will put
it in writing will publish and
whether agenda will put this on
the website we'll we'll do a
little bit act they will see how
it works okay.
Any questions right one.
All right first up Senate one
twenty two Senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the Judiciary
Committee this is a bill that we
saw previously.
It passed the Senate.
Unanimously.
And.
Just read at a time in the house
the.
Person who brought this to.
Issue forward to me as just we
try again.
This deals with something very
simple the use of the R. X.
symbol is.
Associating in most people's
minds with pharmacies.
That are ex symbol has become so
widely used that is it's kind of
losses unique status as a.
As an indication of the pharmacy
solely we see it in connection
with the EDD plans was fun us
with.
settlements with all sorts of
things and yet we have it in our
law that it is not legal for
somebody to use it for anything
other than the pharmacy.
The person that brought this to
me is from the the pharmacist
who owns Duran's pharmacy in
Albuquerque.
She started a coffee shop when
Jason program building internet
Jason building.
And use the our acts in
connection with the name of that
the.
Coffee shop this call remedy.
And was told that she she could
no longer do that that is
moaning Gaddis she is here with
me today and
I'd like to speak as my expert
witness Mr chairman explaining
why this is important to her and
why this simple change would be
crucial thank you.
So the chairman and members of
the committee my name is Monique
at us and I'm with Duran central
pharmacy in Albuquerque and
I have a coffee shop called
remedy coffee in in the logo is
the R. X. symbol
this symbol has become a
universal symbol for Health
beyond just medicines and I've
seen it on so I seen it on net
on cannabis dispensaries granola
bars even some hiking trails and
Bernalillo county have the R. X.
symbol on them.
As a member of the New Mexico
pharmacists association and past
president the association even
has the R. X. in their logo they
don't dispense drugs none of
these products have prescription
medications and I'm and I'm just
asking that we get rid of this
archaic statue you that
Says that only pharmacists or
pharmacies can use the R. X.
symbol I appreciate it thank
you.
The
Do not receive any request.
For opposition to the bill.
the only request for support in
addition the sponsor was miss
Gatiss we heard from her thank
you for your presentation
support will go to members of
the committee questions or
comments.
I see no hands us to be
recognized Senator Ivey Soto.
General.
Our and
But I want to questions but I
was kind of concerned that I've
I've I've actually heard.
All of the situation our.
Well concerned about is the
pharmacy board is not is not
present way in one way or the
other I'm I'm wondering though
why wrap this.
I'm noticing on page two.
Winds one three.
We also have a have a exclusion
on the on the use of the word
apothecary.
Which also has us on page two
line twenty three as applied to
veterinarians of veterinarians
and and and you know we have we
have there is a
Representative top.
one of the hotels in Albuquerque
this project pop the Kerry used
to be a hospital there is a
there's actually a restaurant.
Senator Stewart and I
went to yesterday after work
which are on it everything is we
agree that by the way for those
of you who are interested in
such and such fair are the name
to the apothecary.
Our and and I know that a member
of the
medical marijuana locations that
the telephone the pharmacy.
apps are also refer themselves
as as part areas are and so
Senator morning if if it would
be a family member to strive to
work hard to carry I think I
would be asked to leave and.
Next month repository shop but
but this right apothecary in
both of those Representative of
those locations.
Mr chairman and senator Ortiz
under and no objections
their and realize your.
That is a problem there as well.
And if you think that would be
helpful yes.
Yeah it you know it's it's it's
it's something that actually
as we also have as a member
press is that use that and and
they're not trying to pass
themselves off as a pharmacy so
Mr chairman again or this time I
would move on page two one three
eight sprite the road apothecary
no comment afterwards page to
or riding twenty three a strike
the work apothecary and
but I'm not thereafter.
The way I trust you have the
amendment certainly some of us
just ask a question before you
go to the full committee of the
explain for me the reason that
you're proposing distract weird
apothecary but not apothecary
shop please.
Because of the health care shop
it's it's investments only
district one hundred other.
the best chairman's preference
of we're gonna go down that
route I'll be happy to expanding
them to include the other as
well.
I would like to know there's a
distinction or difference in
your mind between one of the
other and if not it would seem
to be more consistent to strike
both rather than one not the
other yeah I remember the
distinction between the
droppings distance for the
difference so certainly I would
I would actually
All of our primary number to
include on on page two line for
apothecary shop in the calm of
their after as well as page two
lines
twenty three twenty four popular
shop of the common there after.
I'm only I trust you have the
proposed amendment before the
committee the senator if you
know my understanding is that
you do not object to the
proposed amount.
However Mister chairman with
makes for windows to see if she
might have.
Of course miss Gatiss.
I'm as a pharmacist I I don't
object to that either but I do
think it is important to get rid
of the insignia pieces yes thank
you.
Senator Ortiz panel can we
consider C. friendly amendments
yes you can Mr chairman.
Committee members with other
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Anyone is there any objection
adoption of the proposed
amendment.
The chair saying none that
amendment is adopted Senator
Katie Ivy Soto I thank you Mr
chairman having amended the bill
going not satisfied I would we
would pass as amended.
Committee members want to do
pass motion.
For US Senate one twenty two as
amended further discussion on
the proposed bill as amended and
second.
Senator Stewart any further
discussion.
Saying none is there any
objection to a do pass on Senate
bill one twenty two as amended.
Seeing none Senator Ortiz we
don't have a due pass thank you
very much Mr chairman and
committee members thank you
center I have a billiard
Committee all I'm going to
hopefully have you seen at the
very end of year agenda today
all right you want to actually
end on years I would okay good
Senator Lopez also has a couple
of bills and wanted to wait till
the end we'll try to get you in
right before hers.
You Mr Senator I have I want
over there right now too so when
we do we will be able to get two
years a senator Morris all of us
to work thanks.
Bill.
Senator Moores decision sure
we'll hear your whole.
I was gonna note Senator Moores
rake Lavery center you can make
sure that you got your vote
first.
Of course not a lot.
I learned that in nine years.
All right thank you Sir you know
thank you Mr.
It's not a more jumbo
Let's see I am looking for is.
Senator Rodriguez issued ready
at.
All right Senator Baca than
Senate seventy four please.
Thank you Mr chair I don't think
I'd be up so quick well let me
see here.
The chair gathers no moss
Senator Baca.
Senate bill seventy four is a
places a forty five day reserves
on the the emergency health
orders and requires legislative
approval to require to what
extent class out forty five days
just to methods of doing this
and and just percent background
on this when initially
introduced seven Senate bill
seventy four limited to fourteen
days
through some more negotiations
which and our and health and
public affairs.
we we took that to forty five
days of the argument made sense
and so that's where it stands
now additionally the other
change was to wait when the
legislative when the legislature
was not in session previously it
would be simple leadership that
would have had to either approve
of the continuing or the
amending of the of the health
order that has been changed now
to of the Legislative Council
which includes leadership but
also includes a wider membership
of the body to approve or will
to to continue or to amend.
The health orders so upon
issuance of a help order
the current the current deal
with the amendments would allow
health order
Under entered into the entered
into under the public health act
of two automatically terminate
in forty five days of less
legislative approval is provided
legislative approval.
In the in the regular session or
network we happen to be in
special session would be simply
by a vote of both chambers and a
joint resolution approving the
continuing to serve them and of
health orders a past the forty
five days if if not in session
Legislative Council which
currently meets every thirty
days or so would then not be in
there in the enabled with that
power to either amend or
continue of the health order
currently according to CSL New
Mexico is only one of twelve
states right now that doesn't
have any relevant positions
required some for some form
letters legislative oversight.
Of executive merging sea powers
in twenty twenty of legislative
chambers in at least thirty
states introduced bills such as
this Montoya was to limit that
power.
I'm this is not this is not a
opinion for the
a position statement on the
health orders itself so Mr chair
and members in if you believe in
the health orders that is great
if you do not that is great of
the the all this does is provide
a wider balancing our between
the health orders and the
representatives of the people
into another another items that
I think it addresses is the
executive with itself has been
under tremendous scrutiny for
the health orders I I think that
the public would be well served.
And and well satisfied if if
there was a wider member of a
wider a wider selection of
individuals represent them to
to greeted the ascertainment
number to continue all and so I
think that would just dispersed
some of the the scrutiny off of
the executive give a wider say
give the people some import
which I think we can agree many
desire and and I think in the
end be better governance and
provide a better answers it
should we find ourselves in this
situation and that's all I have
no comment to questions or
public comment which it require
thank you Senator Baca center
Baca use five minutes of the
minutes allowed advocacy that
leaves five minutes for other
supporters we had a request in
advance four of four five
speakers on allowing less than
one minute not to make a parts
and equipment and support they
are listed in this order and
comments Oshana spring Melanie
Rubin was the first three will
take them in that order provided
they're already ready and on the
call so miss Clements would you
for first of all be connected to
recognize you have one minute.
We have is comments Mr chair she
disconnected her audio.
She is disconnected I see you
Miss claimants but you're not
connected for audio.
Okay are yes one medically I
want.
All right I'm I'm just I'm I
need some of the most seven
structural engineer.
And I've been working Mexico
after about seventeen years and
I you are utility instructional
utility planning and projection.
I'm I'm going to ask you to
support seventy four.
mainly because one of the good
things about our legislature's
each of New York.
our volunteers and so you have
to have other jobs outside of of
this job that you Sir of the
public in the legislature and so
each of you brings your own
expertise in your field to the
table.
And when the governor is making
decisions regarding lockdowns
and such I think she would
benefit quite a bit from.
a a more diverse group of
experts come to the table to
help make decisions.
and one of the reasons I say
this as I'm sure you all
remember last year when
grocery stores were severely
curtailed.
They're allowed capacity.
And then summer shut down for
exceeding the number of rapid
response cases and as an
engineer who could option plans.
Utility projections I could see
right away that there was a big
problem with this just based on
the population I did a
calculation Virginia county
where I live and I can tell
that.
Based on our population our
number of households and the
number of times a typical family
goes to the grocery store.
Thank you Mr I have to have to
go recognize the next speaker
Mashona spring please for one
minute.
Was on a spring.
I see you Mr.
Here Shamus spring I see what
you're there you go you have one
minute ma'am and then you'll be
followed by was ruined for one
minute okay.
This last year has witnessed
unbelievable actions from
government officials I've been
discussed you know cold at the
Tierney perpetrated upon the
American people we the people
need to be heard are suffering
it's gone unanswered for way too
long now is the legislature's
opportunity to act with the
constitutional dignity needed to
balance an over reach of power
at the executive level.
my perspective only does it
matched with the party not
listening to the will of the
people we consider voting no on
SB seven four which certainly
deserves a resounding yes so
thank you for your consideration
and please support Senate bill
seventy four thank you thank you
for being thank one more speaker
Mr Ruben blades and support.
Hello can you hear me yes thank
you I've got a very bizarre
audio overlay right now so I
can't really hear very well.
My name is Melanie Rubin I'm a
constituent from Albuquerque and
I wanted to appear in support of
SB seventy four appreciate the
opportunity to speak I represent
the New Mexico freedoms Alliance
and I wanted to thank all of you
for your service in New Mexico I
believe that as Senator Baca
said.
Can you hear me.
Sorry good all right so I didn't
know what you if you heard what
I said before I've got a very
strange echo.
I'm so I wanted to agree with
what Senator Baca said that this
is not
for or against the emergency
orders but that I wanted to
speak to of the desire to have
of balance of powers in our
state and to have an opportunity
for constituents to be
represented by our legislators
and I think this bill gives us
an opportunity to have that
happen so I believe that it's a
good step in the right direction
to correct our balance of powers
and allow our public to
to speak on our behalf through
our legislators so thank you for
your consideration thank you
very much.
That the laws for the equipment
and support while you're it was
no requests to organize
opposition the legislation and I
was not the advice of anyone who
contacted us wishing to speak in
opposition what state and so we
will go to committee members on
Senate seventy point by
insurance now can anyone and
wish to speak on this thank you
may I have we will recognize so
we can allocate the time
showgrounds anyone.
The speakers etcetera Ivy Soto
any others Senator Ivey Soto
anticipating now Senator Stewart
all right any others all right
that's not to preclude anybody
but it lets me know our time
accordingly Senator Ivey Soto
followed by Senator Stewart.
Thank you very much a Mr
Chairman representative market
so more understanding of the
effects.
On the amendment that was made
in the first committee.
Is that right now a and I'm
looking at at.
The the impact of section two.
Our thanks Amanda.
Right now my understanding is
that public health order
automatically expires and must
be re issued.
Every thirty days.
but but is done so unilaterally.
And and is that is that as
Amanda this bill would actually
grant an additional fifteen days
before it would have to be.
Renewed so the governor's health
order would actually stay in
effect on longer.
What would require if the
legislature is in session
residents of the of the
legislature or if not would
require
acquiescence by Legislative
Council in order to end.
And and and then again instead
of every thirty days to be every
forty five days that that with
the tickets.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivey Soto that that's exactly
correct this was just a a good
faith measure to to introduces
forty five games to show that
we're not limiting the
governor's ability Mr chair and
senator to effectively govern
during an emergency warning
anyway restraining an action by
the executive which Mr chair and
senator I believe is of crucial
and that in a time of the number
of urgency it's too cumbersome
obviously for a branch such as
ours to step in and and take
action you know these are the
reasons of having an executive
and so that was the the purpose
of that and that was a
suggestion as I stated in health
and public affairs which I felt
like was there a a good idea and
so that's what that was placed
in there the Legislative Council
just that that gave it a wider
body of representation it seems
convenient because a the.
come together every thirty days
and and they do a number of
things on behalf of the of the
legislature as well already and
so it seems logical that they
would be the appropriate body if
we were not in session to turn
to and thirty day are forty five
days is plenty of time for you
know to to even gain some
consensus within caucus and
within the body as to as to what
would be to be done and present
that.
Mr chairman and senator I would
appreciate the compliments that
you have in this.
In this bill particularly as
amended in this is
Your your with the amendment you
both actually you've expanded
the governor's authority are in
terms of of a health order.
and you also expanded the
legislative members that would
be involved in in weighing in
and in on the continuation of a
health order should we have
an extended public health
emergency at some point in the
future and and and so and so in
that regard I think I think this
is this is
This actually I'm I think in
connect not nicely balanced.
Yes of legislation that that
does not I don't see this as as
as restricting a governor's
authority just the opposite like
I said it it actually stands
that in the short run while also
including the legislature in the
process and so thank you very
much for the work that you've
done this and for the for the
the bill that you got that there
was it was that clarification I
was looking for I appreciate
very much thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Baca I I do not have a
copy of the amendments from the
previous committee I'm I'm
looking for them I think I've
just found them of so much
questions revolve around there I
understand you've you've taken
out fourteen days and put forty
five instead
So then you are striking a joint
statement you're making it the
majority of the members of the
New Mexico Legislative Council
So can you just walk through
very brief briefly the other
amendments issue changed more
than that and I'm I'm trying to
find where you done that you
know really that that is the
meat of it there is there is the
the reason that that for the
changes Mr chair not approach
him is is that
The the changes you're seeing
all court early to the fourteen
days and and just the
methodology Mr chair madam
protect us to how we notify the
governor and so so those are the
other changes you're seeing
obviously when we're in session
we would we would notify the
governor with a a resolution
will and so meeting meeting with
the meeting with the eight
council that would be a done via
a vote and so there really are
no other changes then that in
the amendment if you have
something particularly for me to
look at I'm happy to.
So Mr Chairman Senator Baca
looking at the last one page six
line sixteen okay
so you're striking the remainder
of the line after governor.
And then you strike that
entirety.
So that's where you're asking
the.
The pro tem a nor the leader the
speaker in the minority leader
so if you taken all of those.
Requirements out of the bill or
do you believe that in in some
places.
We madam chair or we take that
out I mean it Mr chair the
amount of content we take that
out were ever in the original
bill we have the leadership so
initially the bill just dealt
with leadership so we have for
members of leadership and so
wherever you see that being
struck it is being replaced with
eight council and a vote by
majority of eight council and so
that that's what that deals with
their Mr chair not approach and.
Let's so Mr chairman and Santo
Pappas for you free place that
everywhere in the bill with the
Legislative Council.
Yes Mister chairman pro tem yes
correct and the thought of being
behind out again is that it's
just a wider body there are of
the county county
advisory members eight council
has I believe thirty members and
eleven voting members I'm much
more than the original for a
much broader sampling of of both
chambers.
All right thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator Baca
for the explanation I appreciate
it thank you.
Committee members.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward I think this is a great
compromise.
With and and hopefully will will
garner bipartisan support I
think you know as a as a body
over the years the legislation
that we passed we basically made
ourselves are relevant and a lot
of the decisions that affect our
constituents.
And I was one of the biggest
things with my constituents as
wasn't necessarily a criticism.
Well what was being done the
orders it was the fact that we
were basically left out of it we
didn't have a way to express our
concerns or have a little bit of
a of balance of power so I think
this is a great way to reinstate
that balance of power have us as
a as a body that has a few more.
mines in the decision making the
come up with the best win win
solution so I think this is a
way moving forward that we can
strike that balance and ensure
that the entire state is
considered in making decisions
if.
Mr chair if I may response to to
what he just said there is a
there is I wanted to inform on
the the committee Mr chair that
there is a bill coming through
on the house side
I feel like this bill if you
have a chance to read that one
is much more nimble it's notable
in that it doesn't require a
ledge a special session to be
called the whole body to come in
it allows us a sampling of the
legislature to to use of the
word of this Mr chair I feel
it's more elegant solution and
what's presented their that has
garnered bipartisan support to
the house going up I would hope
this would garner bite
bipartisan support and I'll be
able to place a Senate bill that
represents us on the governor's
desk for for consideration.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
more questions.
The committee members we should
recognize.
I just have a couple questions
for you Senator you make quite a
number of amendments
this changed my thinking on the
bill this week I I I've got a
different approach than yours
but with the same goal which is
of course the legislature has to
play a more meaningful role
missing combine on us to do so
want one of things that I
proposed the sessions on it
makes it easier for us ourselves
and our special session on the
work that we're doing
extraordinary sessions that we
all have all the tools that now
make that so difficult rescue on
short notice and I think that
would be the ideal is while I
appreciate
your bill which now is the
authority to Legislative Council
to operate the short term as far
better than your original
proposal my money which would
have left or individual
president speaker of the two
chambers non minority numbers
for individuals to.
I agree or disagree with the
governor and we authorized the
the orders to do this also I
think this is far broader makes
more sense the the one question
I have is that this is limited
to
public places is essentially in
relation in order to close the
public places are are four
bedrooms gathering of people so
my understanding is your bill
does not address.
Closures of businesses is not
right.
Mr chair and the and the I would
say that that it does because
that is a a public place and and
so within within the the within
the public health order section
in I think that is the the
authority that is being used
right now for for the governor
to to be able to come in and and
shut down any public place which
would include include
businesses.
Yeah I want to discuss that as a
committee and have you resent
that because again I'm not sure
I agree with you your your your
bill here relates to public
health orders of the governor
and says here that closes any
public place I'm not sure the
business a restaurant are a
Walmart in Albertsons is a
public place
with that definition of that in
a public place is where.
My thinking is the restaurants
of the private business not a
public place but I don't know
that we've got a definition of
what is a public place or not so
you may you might find yourself
in a situation where there's a
disagreement about what your
bill allows the legislature to
limit governor governor and join
now we also says anywhere that
Vigil of the gathering of people
that would see it seems apply to
our church gatherings and
sporting events things of that
kind of
Representative mega rallies.
Things of that kind
but but I'm not sure
you that think this is really
the heart of my remaining
concerns with your bill which is
of I support your intent but but
if the limitation on the
governor to forty five days
subject to review and approval
by the Legislative Council was
gonna come down to the these
words here which is anywhere
that because the public place.
Or for visual limits the
governing up people
Mr chair if you go to the
language that he uses right now
it uses the language public
place I did I did some research
on public place just in case law
because I can find in a really
us all the definition of it and
when it when you go and reach
for health order this is a word
lists public place within the
current health order is the
authority that the health orders
that are being issued right now
relies on so when the list of
health or the B. list this
particular sect of the
particular section of the health
order that lists public places
of which is which is already in
there so we just matched what
what is currently within the
statute of so that the authority
is identical to what we see
right now in place.
Thank you Sir I understand why
you want to use those words that
seem to be consistent with what
we talked about before but I and
that that doesn't give me
confidence that the restaurant
association would not come back
and challenge in order.
that exceeds forty five days in
the clothes restaurants that
argue that that's not a public
place I don't know the answer to
this I I your time is used
elsewhere but I don't know that
that that's not gonna be a
fight.
the other on a different
subject.
Your bill also relates the to
the gathering of people I
haven't studied the case that
order and my colleagues have my
understanding is there's a
one or more Supreme US Supreme
Court rulings that relate to I
believe it's California law the
the
We may restrict or limit
gathering of people in the
context of religious settings or
house of worship not not Center
you do you are you can you know
whether the current.
Supreme Court rulings for more
US report would allow the state
or the governor to limit
gatherings of people for
purposes of worship.
Thank you Mr chair what will
currently we've seen this
exercise already under the
current health order.
where we're that those
limitations have been put in
place and repeatedly they have
been challenged already in this
state and have failed to meet
muster up to prevent the shut
down of the church's again this
is the same language that's
being used currently in the
health orders and in the statute
and so again the thinking was
using the same language here
what would correlate to what is
being done to closely match and
not limit in any way the the
Thorgy or make it more narrow
than what the current health
orders entail right now at least
that's for my research Mr chair.
Senator Baca I have I will give
with the the law in this area
because of changes very
frequently Senator Ivey Soto I
see all come to you in a second
here maybe can help clarify this
I guess my question is first of
all with the release from the
New Mexico Supreme Court related
to gathered for purposes of
worship and then whether there
have been Rollings the United
States Supreme Court with regard
to restrictions or limitations
on gatherings for religious
purposes and I don't know Center
Bach I need you know whether
either the state or the US
Supreme Court have
I've given this a recent rulings
that limit the government's
ability to restrict gathering
for purpose of worship you know
the you know the current status
of either of those two chords
I'm I'm only aware of the of the
on lawsuits that have been
brought in the state of New
Mexico thus far and but I can
tell you is that in each
attempts to re open a business
using different different areas
of argument including and I and
I consulted actually on one of
the well not consulted but but I
am was brief briefly introduced
to one of our lawsuits and was
being proposed in it it
circled right around your your
concern of public place some
fairly confident what what we're
talking about they're asked to
the Supreme Court none of those
cases at least from this state
have made it that far they've
all been shut down Mexico
Supreme Court and so they have
not made it to their district or
national level contest yet thank
you Sir Baca center represented
by your gesture I'm wanting what
you have an answer my question
and so this is this will be one
of those times one of the right
to say on that point we now that
we have an answer from the
question that I have you did
away with that last session
well.
Trying to get you on the new
ones that wages on that point is
not a way for you to jump the
line but but on that point it I
think is an important thing to
do to keep me from spinning my
wheels so I'm ask you a question
you know the answer to it
etcetera but somebody else does
not you do it that's one where I
would expect members the on that
point and save me from say Man
you from up are you know this
but are we also necessarily it's
a Sir I was going to have an
answer my question I Mr Chairman
actually Trancers all right your
question on the first is the
state Supreme Court my
understanding is to date in the
case of Romero addresses lu Han
Grisham rural that the governor
does have the authority that she
has been exercising with regard
to restaurants.
Our the the the second
issue with regard to churches
and we're supporting court this
actually the first case that the
US legislative session king of
New York
is that the the whatever
provisions are provided for at
that are applicables churches
are cannot be
Distinct from those provided to
non religious
activities or locations and so
we're not with the governor's
health orders in this state have
been sustained as to religious
on gatherings if you will look
to see she.
Though the percentages that are
around in terms of religious
houses of worship viruses are
other locations are not they're
not too far off differently
close so there or or else or
else they're lying and so so
their programs have been
sustained whereas in both
California which was the second
case that the U. S. Supreme
Court ruled on as well as New
York the restrictions on houses
of worship were significantly
distinct from those for non
religious accounts.
I think yes there are so yeah
that was coverages noted
referring to all those records
of hi very good I'm I'm
persuaded that the and your bill
Senator would not run about
where the US reported today or
are you exposed report is that
would.
Senator Ivey Soto up today
today's the latest ruling from
the New Mexico Supreme Court so
that's all the questions I have
committee members any other
questions before we proceed to a
vote.
Anyone else.
Revert to pass right we're on
the Senate seventy four for a do
pass motion of Senator Ivy Soto.
Or
Is there any objection to it two
passed so Senator Stewart is
that a debate or a objection.
Junction Mr Chairman very good
any other Committee members
wishing to lodge an objection to
the do pass mode.
saying none will report use
proper with you fast motion
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee seventy
four.
Of the next item in order on our
agenda back to that would be
Senator Sedillo Lopez on Senate
bill eighty six we have a
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Choose Senator Sedillo Lopez in
our committee.
I'm
not here.
My.
I see so.
Senator Rodriguez on Senate bill
ninety six we'll hear that bill
next Senator Moores did you have
a matter.
No I just was so I was presented
of health and city able prisons
there Mr chair so what are
tourism all right we have
Senator Rodriguez on Senate bill
ninety six Senator Rodriguez you
have up to ten minutes to
support your bill thank you
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee there is an
amendment to the bill you should
have before you we decided to
submit an amendment after
hearing got a presentations from
others who suggested very good
changes at the last committee so
we're right in the amendment
before you hear.
You want me to speak about the
amendment Mr Chairman what is
the bill first to us the reason
for the bill yes thank you very
much Mr chairman and we pass
this bill if you is unanimously
I remember I in two thousand
nineteen and that it was
basically predicated on the fact
that women were dying during the
time they're having they're
giving birth and very high and
alarming rate and so we put
together this committee I it to
the department of health to look
into this to see we can define
the outcomes and and what the
rationale is and reasons for all
these women Diné so I'm this
time the department of health
came and wanted to make some
changes just some improvements
to the bill for example
increasing the membership to
include a better mix of
clinicians and non clinicians
and someone to the committee and
in permitting the at the
mortality in that review
committee to invite guest
experts to meetings to
strengthen case reviews and a
lot of clarification on the bill
and also to permit for
reimbursement for travel for
some of these the meetings with
the maternal mortality review
committee for essential income
loss for example up to a certain
amount and this would come from
the from yeah a federal grant to
that of the forty four year
requests for this purpose but
that's the initial still but
then as the last committee it
passed unanimously but some
changes were recommended by by a
couple of of individuals who we
thought were good so we have
worked with the department of
health and with the individuals
to come up with some additions
that I think are very good they
would add to African Americans
to the committee and to native
American.
As to the committee I to have
more
more of a you know a wide
variety I just committee members
especially with so much so many
changes happening and and so on
so we could look at the
reasoning behind these women
dying out with very the
collaborative and holistic
review and that's really what it
is Mr chairman if you want more
information on the amendment
please let me now it's it's
strange is there one used to
just leafing through papers and
so on thank you.
And I do have and the
epidemiologists the department
of health here and also the
policy director and Dr Tracy
Collins the cabinet secretary to
help answer any questions you
having thank you right now you
want to recognize and use of
your time or any of your
experts.
Yes Mister chairman I will ask
for just that yes very short
comments if we only have to
thank you.
Dr Coronado would you come up
in.
Say a few words.
Yes.
Yes.
Members.
Thank you for summarized what we
wanted to improve on the twenty
nineteen bill and we have as
you're showing here agree to
some additional changes
amendments what we're proposing
and this will help us to make
committee members need more
accessible in mental health as a
chain permissions to reimburse
our members who are facing any
kind of hardship
especially in the if I have to
travel to meetings but it also
lets us use our federal funds
from the CDC to help reimburse
members if needed.
We have doctor Collins thank
you.
Thank you doctor colonel Dr
Collins is the cabinet secretary
you wanted just to say a few
words if you may Mr chairman.
Sure thank you senator
Mr chair members of the
committee I fully support the
proposed amendment I think it
constructing this and we with
good community input I think
it's a great ideas on fully
supported and thank you.
All right the.
Senator let's see the ticket the
amendment first up all move the
adoption of the amendment.
The second.
Me on the option investment.
Senator Baca.
My on the amendment itself is
there any question
from committee members on but
actually amendment.
Is there any objection adoption
of the amendment.
I see none
the manager Senate bill ninety
six shown as forty six point one
by the quarter is adopted by the
committee on the bill as amended
committee members with questions
or comments.
Chair saying not a motion is in
order.
Mr pass those minute.
Right.
Chair with a second.
Your any objection to adoption
of the new passed motion of
Senate bill ninety six as
amended.
Seeing none Senator Rodriguez
able to pass thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and thanks to all the
people who spoke in favor of the
bill thank where the six.
This Senator Sedillo Lopez.
On Senate bill eighty six so you
ready to go.
Senator Senator Sedillo Lopez
Steve I see there Senator
Sedillo was you'll have to be
unmuted there you go good thank
you center city open since two
forty three all have ten minutes
to support your bill either
yourself or with any expert you
wish to read but we live on the
it's two forty four begin
please.
Thank you Mr chair produced
water is a euphemism for a toxic
oil and gas waste product it is
a fluid with over one thousand
proprietary fracking chemicals
many of them highly toxic it
also includes highly saline
water from the oil bearing
geologic formations with the put
potential for naturally
occurring radium radioactive
material from the uranium
deposits that are often in that
area.
For every barrel of oil produced
industry produces four to seven
times as much of this blue.
Current environmental
regulations require industries
to either reduce this waste for
enhanced oil recovery drilling
or fracking or dispose of it
through deep injection wells
this disposal method has not
been proven safe and is known to
cause earthquakes and sinkholes
like the one already in
Carlsbad.
The liability and costs of
future environmental disasters
will toward the costs of
regulating it
Reduced water now fundamentally
this bill does two things first
it compels industry to reduce
the volume up and we use its
waste by prohibiting freshwater
used in fracking for produced
water can be used instead and
seconded fulfills the original
intent of the produced water act
two thousand nineteen by
mandating safeguards to protect
public health the environment
and fresh water from this waste
stream it makes the spilling
produced water illegal and
provides enforceable
consequences fines from spills
and spilling produced water will
be you will be able to pay for
more transparency in the oil and
gas data compilation and has a
state considers reuse of
produced water outside of the
oil and gas industry this bill
requires a full disclosure of
chemicals and tracking of
produced water and treated
produced water so that New
Mexicans and our administrative
agencies you know what we are
dealing with.
Over forty indigenous land thank
you public health and
environmental organizations
Representative representing tens
of thousands of New Mexicans
have expressed support for just
the eighty six I have norm down
as an expert here today.
I yield to him.
Mr gong.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is norm
Gaume I'm a retired water and
wastewater licensed engineer I'm
a graduate of Hobbs high school
in New Mexico State University I
live in rural Sandoval County I
currently serve on the New
Mexico produced water research
consortium's technical steering
committee the consortium is
addressing none of the issues
discussed here were covered by
this bill.
This bill is intended to advance
to matters of public interest
first to protect our public
sorry protector limited
freshwater supplies.
And second to protect public
health the environment in fresh
water from oil and gas pollution
I would like to share a chart.
That I have prepared then we'll
speak to now.
And apparently I don't have
screen sharing privileges.
I just give you permission.
Thank you.
A colleague and I prepared the
analysis reported in this chart.
For excel spreadsheets
downloaded from the oil
conservation division statistics
web page
basis of this chart.
The blue bars show total oil and
gas energy production reported
by the top forty New Mexico
operators for twenty seventeen
to twenty nineteen.
With further left but axis the
Orange Line is the number of
that operators toxic waste water
spills from million barrels of
oil and gas production.
It uses the vertical axis on the
right.
Operator still supported data
posted on the oil conservation
division website reveal extreme
differences between operators.
XTO energy the tenth ranked
producer reported five point one
to toxic waste water spills per
million barrels of oil and gas.
W. X. G. Permian LLC reported
four point seven one toxic waste
water spills per million gallons
of oil and gas WTXF the company
whose pipeline burst in requests
to Carlsbad families in their
home and animals.
Contrast that with EOG resources
the top ranked producer with
this bill rate of zero point two
six wastewater spills per
million gallons of oil and gas.
WPS bills toxic waste water
eighteen times more frequently
than the OAG.
Most bills are preventable
operators attribute three of
every four spills to equipment
failure corrosion human error or
overflow of tanks and jets.
New Mexico law and rules now
rely on oil and gas operators
voluntary efforts and
expenditures to prevent
negligent in preventable spills.
These voluntary efforts to
reduce bills for not working.
Some operators invest in good
equipment practices management
and have relatively very good
records others do not instill
their waste water over the
landscape with impunity the
state our environment and people
are being abuse Senate bill
eighty six would level the
spills playing field.
My other point has to do with
the use of produced water.
Any good water and wastewater
engineer knows that water
conservation and waistline
reduction are generally the most
effective first steps to reduce
over use of scarce freshwater
and diminish the cost of waste
treatment and disposal.
Every bit of fresh and brackish
water unnecessarily use for deep
drilling fracking is turned into
poisonous waste water laden with
salt.
Multiple stories reported during
last year but the Carlsbad
current Argus describe and
illustrate huge new oil and gas
wastewater treatment facilities
in treated water storage ponds
to find the drillers and
frackers with recycle produced
water use in lieu of fresh
water.
Industry leaders are quoted
urging this practice some say it
is better for fracking
a representative of the U. G.
resources the top ranked oil
producer New Mexico told me
recently that energy's water
uses ninety eight percent
recycled wastewater another
operator told me their company
has disabilities to deliver
recycle produced water
throughout the Permian basin.
Senate bill eighty six would
help New Mexico by.
Reserving scarce freshwater
resources and reducing the
volume of oil and gas wastewater
requiring safe disposal.
Thank you Mr chairman.
You.
Sir Senator Lopez Mr chair are
next to expertise Mario Atencio.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee my name is Mario
Atencio I am a of course my
mother fathers of state Marianna
politicians you are selecting
share my screen of
See here for New Mexico incident
risk of our but our incident
report.
of February seventeenth two
thousand nineteen a major
release occurred and from New
during well three fifteen eight
twenty fifty over fifty thousand
gallons of produced water
released into the escrow Water
wash.
That's what it's going to wash
is in the greater talk
landscaping flows directly into
the tropical cultural natural
store park.
The incident report findings
from this report.
Of we we contend there's no way
to verify but noted the findings
of the close out report because
of because according to a New
Mexico tech report entitled the
oil natural gas potential
Sandoval county New Mexico and
Felicia the groundwater with
discussion of modern drilling
oil more oil drilling methods of
possibilities for aquifer
contamination and and supplement
report says that within sixty
days produced water will get
down to grab get down to the
ground water in in places such
as ephemeral washes where
Escalada wash is that is a
ephemeral wash with with the
type of foil described and so we
are seeing here on the screen
right now is exactly where it
actually happened the water used
for fracking out there is
actually coming from state trust
land from state.
Eight trucks why well
well two hundred fifty thousand
gallon loopholes are put out
middle nowhere of course our
land out there whereas the novel
and the novel people out there
though have never had any really
if districts get water oil came
in and took up all the water
from the ground probably
possibly contaminated
So here we say if if according
to this report and the ground
water is contaminated.
Of the importantly the state
without proper regulation has
injured.
Federally reserved water rights
of individuals limit individual
in the in a lot of lands under
delegated authority from region
six EPA mess of our middle
department and the OCD have
jurisdiction over federal Indian
lands and and this put the state
a very very tough position so in
the consideration you happening
with amendments to Senate bill
eighty six I do want to really
want to have you look deeper
into where and how of this
industry with the unregulated
after this big snow happens so
you're seeing pictures of what
happened afterward containment
ponds up do and others a minor
relief bills happen again at
this very thing site we took now
probably secretary of interior
Debra how and senator Ben ray lu
Han a chairman Alan Lowenthal
and chairman Alan all rural
poverty these sites
you see after unless we raise in
this the rose rose a huge stake
in the maybe a we a month later
they started doing something
about it and so this self
reporting self regulating
industry is dangerous the public
health team has to figure
landscape but I really want of
of recommended the past for
fitness equipment is Senate bill
eighty six thank you very much
your cancer centers in Europe is
that completes the ten minutes
for advocacy
as we get the committee today
I've explained the committee all
but about how I hope to continue
to come to the conduct the
meeting of that we now have ten
minutes for opposition to the
bill my first question is a this
is really for the staff for the
secretary have we've been
notified of an organized
presentation in opposition to
the legislation.
We have.
Looking through those who are on
the.
hearing.
I I have been told I I thought
the.
This is from a lot of going to
give you can
Should go to my understanding
was there was an organized
opposition to the bill my
correct about that.
You know.
Right.
Hearing and seeing Mohan.
Mr chair.
Our realtor will just joined the
call.
Well Mr holder it was was there
a opposition organized to this
bill to the Senate eighty six
yes chairman Cervantes and
Gabrielle Care hold on behalf of
CAG operating I worked closely
with miss Amy berry B. of New
Mexico oil and gas association
as well as Patrick Killen dean
arch let the and ms Chavez I
don't see I see Mr beyond the
call I'm not quite certain where
and Mr can I see Mr Killen now
and I suspect agency are to let
to will be joining shortly but
ms berry B. would begin to Mr
Killen excusing miss baby the
myself to Mr Killen ms or to let
the in the administrative
office.
Okay because I understand you
all to working as yourselves to
be heard in opposition no we
recognize for ten minutes I will
do it for you all to measure
your time accordingly sure sure
that each of you has the option
to say whatever you may wish to
say and we'll get if one of you
think should be on the ten
minutes without anyone else
being that'll be on you so
here's what I understand to be
hearing is the first of all
agency the the opposition we
this very be.
Mr Killen.
The I'm sorry a request for my
missing here miss Archuleta.
It cracks chairman serve on days
Mr B. Mr Holt Mr Kellen ms
Archuleta and then agency Thomas
with that order them thank you.
Very.
Good afternoon chairman.
All of you will follow in that
order of the the zoom host won't
recognize you and and bring it
in that order and will begin the
time for opposition at two fifty
seven.
Good afternoon chairman survive
doesn't committee members my
name is Amy there be and I'm the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
in the interest of time in
pursuant to the direction that
was outlined at the start of
this meeting my colleagues
registered to speak today will
outline various devastating
impacts of the proposed
legislation before you I will
start by directing this
committee's attention please to
section one of the bill banning
the use of fresh water for
drilling two years ago the
legislature in its wisdom and
with thoughtful consideration
passed the produced water act in
part thanks to that legislation
our industry has been growing
the use of recycled water but it
is not sufficiently established
yet to supply all planned wells
therefore thirty to fifty
percent of all planned wells
would not proceed by banning the
use of fresh water in drilling
activities at depths lower than
a protected fresh waters of oil
and gas is stopped in New Mexico
first what is a protected
protected fresh waters of there
is no definition as noted in the
FIR Budget Office of the state
engineer the bill does not
define that term establish a
process for defining that term
or assigned the responsibility
of defining the term to any
agency fresh water is necessary
for drilling testing and after
completions to protect an
optical for fresh water must be
used well drilling through it
fresh water is also needed when
testing lines and cups fresh
water with the GDS content of a
thousand other just for leader
is best for pressure when
testing lines and looking for
leaks.
If testing is to detect problems
before they occur it is much
safer for the environment to use
one thousand milligrams per
litre fresh water then produced
water finally freshwater is used
to flush the system after
completions when equipment is
being brought out of the hole if
there is a leak in the system it
is more environmentally safe to
discover that leak be a
freshwater than with produced
water the true intent of this
bill is to stop drilling in New
Mexico it is for these reasons
that Moga strongly opposes
Senate bill eighty six.
Thank you Mr ho.
Chairman somebody's commit
committee members Gabrielle Care
Holt COG operating I would like
to draw your attention to
section two and section three
this afternoon section two
ignores existing rules it
interferes with an existing
rulemaking case and it creates a
conflicting penalty structure
paragraph eight prohibits all
spills obviously spills do occur
because they occur the oil
conservation division has to
rules to address this rule
twenty nine releases and rule
thirty remediation starting on
April first the oil conservation
commission will begin he
rulemaking hearing to amend rule
twenty nine to make any still a
violation the same thing that
this bill urges the scientific
and regulatory experts of the
commission should be given the
opportunity to consider the
issue and decide.
Representative B. creates a
liability in penalty structure
that is inconsistent with the
current law New Mexico statutes
seventy dash to dash thirty one
D. two years ago this
legislature granted the OCD
authority to administer
penalties and set out the
factors for OCD to consider when
determining how much of a
penalty to issue Senate bill
eighty six sets forth the rigid
penalty structure and contrast
to current law paragraph C.
since penalties so the OCD and
violation of article twelve
section for the New Mexico
constitution now directing you
to section three and makes
permitting impossible with
blanket prohibitions the policy
has been to encourage the re use
of produced water to avoid the
use of fresh water Senate bill
eighty six discourages recycling
by making permitting impossible
it's specifically prohibits the
OCD from issuing permits for
produced water facilities
disposal and pets if any of
those activities could
potentially result in water
pollution bill eighty six stops
the agency with expertise from
being flexible when reading
rules in issuing permits for
produced water use thank you for
your time.
You Patrick Gillen.
Mister Rogers Committee members
I'm Patrick Killen lobbyist for
chevron we respectfully oppose
SB eighty six section six and
seven will disrupt the progress
being made implementation of the
produced water act House Bill
five forty six it's legislature
passed and the governor signed
into law two years ago the
twenty nineteen acts eight of
the creation of the produced
water consortium which is truly
a groundbreaking partnership
between New Mexico State
University in the state
environment department this
consortium is making real
progress in promoting fresh
water conservation encouraging
produced water recycling and
advancing sound science
in closing chevron is asking the
committee to allow full
implementation of produced water
act to keep the great work of
the produced water consortium in
New Mexico State University
moving forward given the
environment department the time
to complete their research
public outreach and rulemaking
is mandated by House Bill five
four six we therefore
respectfully ask the vote no on
Senate bill eighty six thank
you.
Yeah out Archuleta thank you Mr
chairman committee members say
arch led the government
relations manager New Mexico and
registered lobbyist for XCO
Exxon Mobil I ask you today to
allow the agencies to complete
the process the started two
years ago with the original
produced water water bill was
passed I urge you all to review
the FIR for the agencies and the
act right now to ask the
agencies to stop doing the
collaborative work that has
begun is fiscally questionable
at best the produced water
collaborative is making great
progress in direct conflict Mr
brown's at Astor Tatian please
know that currently no produced
water has been allowed to be
taken outside of the oil and gas
industry and can not be until
the NMED rules have been
established and the
collaborative has done an in
depth research in to see it to
see if it's even possible to use
it it's extremely unclear how
the penalties in this bill
intend to work with the existing
penalties is this in lieu of
those or in addition to in that
same vein there are number of
terms in this bill that are use
new definitions that are not
standard and for that matter are
extremely unclear the definition
for fresh water is far too broad
and is not in line in keeping
with the EPA standards that have
been in place for decades in
many New Mexico communities
they're drinking water can be up
to five thousand TVS total
dissolved solids they do treat
the that water but if this bill
does not clarify how that would
be impacted in those communities
I will I ask you today to vote
no against for a note in this
bill and to consider all the
implications and the work that
the agencies have done so far
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of Marathon Oil I am
happy to be the anchor of this
expert panel before you today
highlighting the issues with
Senate bill eighty six Marathon
Oil also respectfully as opposed
to Senate bill eighty six Mr
Chairman produced water is a
reality of an industry that
though often vilified is working
to lower its carbon footprint
and find ways.
We had a fine way to support the
environment of which it operates
in the produced water act is the
fruits of that work two years
ago experts and stakeholders
came before this body in
collaboration to encourage
innovation and investment in an
area that had become the leading
dilemma facing companies what to
do with the ratio of produced
water two barrels of oil this
bill seeks to undo that
collaborative technical
comprehensive work of which just
had rules adopted in October
twenty twenty with regard to
recycling in which public
comment and technical input were
received this proposal does not
make communities where these
operations take place safer but
creates uncertainty and trucks
down conservation efforts that
at this moment are being copied
in other oil producing states Mr
chairman members of the
committee given the produced
water act chance and its
corresponding rules a chance to
continue to support and the
efforts of this budding industry
as we all work to conserve
freshwater and support our
industry partners thank you for
your time.
We chose.
Eight are requests the speakers
in opposition to the legislation
before we go to committee
members with questions and
discussion but we recognized the
following individuals have
indicated their support for the
legislation.
Appreciated the committee
meeting today a penny also see
on I think or or all on
forgiving ceiling I believe
Stephanie Hahn Amato Johanna Ben
como Joseph throughout this land
ship are.
L. Metcalfe.
A real risk strangle
has has indicated support on
behalf of New Mexico interfaith
power and light I believe
Artemis you're more of a car
were support on behalf of jako
John Brown thin and crispy and
Dulu for I don't want to
progressive caucus age night we
have a New Mexico voices for
children imagine that ray is all
in support.
In addition to those who we've
heard from in opposition
Gen Winchester for the
independent petroleum
association New Mexico Liz
Taylor for the San Juan water
commission it's like energy
services in opposition also in
opposition Arthur holder Devin
industry Act Kayla hard for
young on on Verde coalition
Michael Miller for the Permian
basin petroleum association also
in opposition Missy Currier for
Occidental petroleum.
Of Matt Thompson for Apache
corporation Jason Weaks for
Exxon Carlos on tech for New
Mexico business coalition and
might we just were indivisible
Knoxville.
Of those are the individuals who
asked us to lodge their support
opposition to the bill Mexico to
committee members committee
members if you can Mr chair so
we're not going to hear from the
supporters like we heard from
the off the opposition so the
center city but we are we are
ten minutes of support we are
ten minutes of opposition.
Ten minutes were was for my
presentation of the bill now
what we're doing Senator is
we're we're talking ten minutes
for us I advocacy in support of
the bill ten minutes for
opposition
that's the procedure we've
adopted for this committee
that's we're doing here today
okay Mr chair I also have with
me to help answer questions are
Gail Evans and Dale to remiss.
We're also experts in there here
with me to to help me with any
questions.
As the experts who already
presented
in center city office your call
on whichever expert will help
you best to answer any questions
committee members all right so
does the first State get an idea
of committees I also have item I
prove I provided an amendment
last Friday to the committee
secretary.
Yes I want to go ahead we'll
we'll take that order up Senator
Sedillo Lopez on the amendment
please just an explanation of
the amount.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
so ignore that
The new material to be entered
in order number one of the
amendment because of we have a
correction to it then on page.
Nine.
Line eight strike worker safety
and strike the second comma.
And the reason is the when we
heard what we heard in
conservation was a good point
that the expertise on worker
safety is not is not present in
in the current structure.
we also on page nine one nine
strike including and certainly
in lieu thereof and and strike
wildlife and domestic animals
again that is because we heard
in conservation as we discussed
the that expertise is not in the
existing regulatory structure on
page eleven line one strike and
just to make it flow on page
eleven line ten after kids ate
in service semicolon and.
Eight number eight implement the
fresh water use prohibition in
oil and gas drilling and
development pursuant to section
one of these twenty twenty one
act and provide procedures for
an operator to seek a waiver
from the requirements of section
one of the twenty twenty one act
upon application to the
division.
And that is again because of the
discussion that we have a
conservation that there may be
circumstances in which fresh
water is out is needed in order
to protect I mean yeah the use
of fresh water is needed to
protect fresh water in the basin
and and so that we thought that
was important on page twenty
five line twenty three strike
recycling.
On page twenty six line nineteen
after the paragraph designation
for strike the remainder
remainder of the lying Streich
Lang twenty through upon and it
certainly will there are require
and on on page twenty six line
twenty one strike such discharge
and insert in lieu thereof a
proposed discharge of treated
produced water.
Mr chair of going to subsection
one.
On page two winds five to ten.
One of the things that Mr chair
raised in conservation was that
protected freshwater resource
those were not defined and I am
I we referred you to the
To OCD and the definitions that
they have their.
because the point was well taken
the protected freshwater
resource owns was is not defined
in statute and we would not want
to encourage litigation what
this is about is to hold oil and
gas companies accountable and
not to necessarily create
litigation.
So we want to change the
existing language to for oil and
gas drilling over so we've so.
Remove the comma after deaths.
The lower than and cross out
protected.
Leaves fresh water but then
cross out resources of loans.
An operator shall use produced
water recycled water or treated
water in lieu of fresh water so
this goes along with subsection
eight that we've we've announced
and it simply of a directive to
protect freshwater.
And to use produced water
recycled water treated water
except as necessary to protect
freshwater and we believe that
that addresses your concern.
All right the challenge Senator
is what we have before the by
right now use your proposed
amendment.
As I understand it which is make
sure that we're all of speaking
together this is the amendment
with what are fifty three point
two.
The right yes right then you're
also proposing an amendment to
that amendment yes
so that the I I do this is
simply not for me let's let's
take your amendment as it stands
and will come back to the
amendment to the amendment all
right but yes but where it says
new material at the top just
ignore all of that.
Right so what is my amendment is
to to the actual the we decided
to leave the language in the
bill instead of trying to create
a new a new paragraph.
And then we editing the language
in the bill so if you ignore.
The top part new material fresh
water use prohibition just
ignored.
Mr chairman I believe what she's
saying is ignore amendment
number one I believe that's
correct Representative do you
want to say the motion to adopt
the amendment with the exception
of per ref number one.
Mr Chairman on behalf of the
sponsor of the bill move
the amendments are to read nine
eight five three point two
except for a moment number one.
Sekhmet discussion purposes
committee members on the
proposed amendment before the
body now one one seven eight six
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Sure thing nobody us to
recognize on the amendment of
pleasure of the committee on the
proposed amendment.
Well if you have a motion a
motion for the adoption
amendment to the further
discussion on that option the
amendment.
Are you saying none is there
objection to adoption of the
amendment.
Members most of you have your
cameras off if I don't see you
on camera and the showing of
show hands I'm going to record
your vote in the affirmative so
one more time on the proposed
amendment to Senate bill eighty
six.
Is there objection adoption the
moment.
Are you saying I'm not
amendments adopted Senator Ivey
Soto let's figure out what we're
doing with her Representative
number one please Senator
Sedillo Lopez we're gonna look
at that paragraph number one of
the proposed amendment and are
you proposing specific language
amending that are Representative
number one yes yes Sir my would
you just take us through that
proposed change to program
number one.
Yes so remove the COVID after
death.
Cross out protected.
Sorry I want one more set one
second there.
So remove the paragraph after
after the word.
There is a comma so it's it's
it's now stated for oil and
water drilling and development
at depths.
Remove the comma after deaths.
I see you're not working off of
language from the amendment
itself at this point is that
right that's correct I'm working
I'm working off the original
bill.
I'm Mr chairman I don't see it
come up to the work that's.
Are you don't.
Okay never mind then then
The line Mr chairman of page and
line.
Okay.
Senator Lopez you have you okay
you know when I'm working off of
is the amendments okay
amendments in context.
Which I printed so what we do.
Mr chairman and managing
projects as well as dozens that
come after that.
Okay so that's good somebody
took the COVID have to doubt
what's so what's the that's
good.
after that
Senator what happened is they
they did include.
One so I need to go to the
original bill Senator Sedillo
Lopez could you please assist
the request of Senator Stewart
by referring to page and line
numbers when you refer to these
immensely yes Sir I need to go
to the original bill I apologize
I I printed out the.
so I need to find the original
bill.
Okay on the original bill.
Page two.
Whine whine.
I.
Okay one six.
with I'm sorry line seven take
out protected.
And then on line seven take out
resources owns.
And then.
Take out the last sentence use
of fresh water in contravention
of this section is a violation
of the oil and gas act.
The whole sentence yes.
Right stay for one more time
Senator delivers.
On page.
on page two wind.
Six one seven the first word of
cross cross out protected.
That same line cross out
resource zones.
And then process the entire a
second sentence use of fresh
water in contravention of this
section is a violation or look
at that and I do have to think
the the.
The company's they got some
really good actors who really
have helped us with
With insuring that this bill
works for for oil and gas.
All right we have a proposed
amendment center every so you
want to say the amendment as for
the committee.
Certainly Mr chairman on our
church.
Are all your lines six north
right.
One seven.
Strike the right protected.
And strike the words resources
owns.
Page two one nine.
And.
Sprite the last sentence of the
members.
Use of fresh water Senator
that's what that's that is from.
Everyone clear until you clear
on the amendment.
Yes.
The further discussion on the
proposed amendment.
My hands of the committee
questions.
I see no one on the proposed
amendment is there any objection
to adoption of the amendment.
See non mentally please record
all members the committee
supporting the adoption of that
amendment.
Back to members of the committee
on the bill as now twice
amended.
Members of the committee for
questions on the bill as now
amended.
Seeing no hands.
Senator o'neill many others
besides center o'neill to be
recognized at this point Senator
Ivy Soto okay ceremonial answer
Ivey Soto.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator for bringing
this forward.
You know I I remember House Bill
five forty six really well two
years ago that was we got a lot
of attention controversy but we
can't we came together on that
bill as a legislature governor
signed it it certainly seems to
be in the spirit of what we all
want is to protect our
environment and produced water
is just you know that's a really
important so important issue I
guess to help me out why why is
House Bill five forty six what
why introduced this bill in
light of what what was a major
step with House Bill five forty
six just help me out with this.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for that question I also
introduced a produced water bill
in two thousand nineteen but it
was a little bit like the
president fracking bill if
required industry is required CD
to keep track of the source of
the water the trajectory of the
water and where the water was
ultimately disposed and then it
asks for a study of the produced
water for additional regulations
I was never invited to
participate in the bill that
actually flow through all of
that bill was actually
introduced after my produced
water bill and I was never I
called the sponsor and said Hey
I have a produced water bill and
I articulated some concerns I
have I never got invited to any
session.
I voted against the bill and I
voted against the bill even
though there were lots of people
for it because it was a
compromise that was very hollow
there was a section of the bill
where they gave OCD a forty two
it to to enforce the act
however it didn't give OCD
resources to enforce the act and
they're unable to do that.
I also followed all of the
produced water hearings that
that the rules that the rule
making process and to show you
treatment disappointed because I
doesn't feel that there are
using the best available science
I also feel very strongly that
OCD needs additional resources
to to do this work and they say
that in their in their
The truth is we don't know
enough about fracking or
fracking waste I think that
first bill did a good thing in
that it provided for possessory
interest and that gave a lot of
of.
Actors you know middle men
people who claim produced water
confidence to be in in to be
able to kind of create a market
and a lot of work is been done
in that sense but the other
thing that has happened in the
interim is there's an average of
of reported this is just with
reported at least two still the
day.
And the it under current law it
is a violation not to report.
But it's not a violation to
actually still so there's no
incentive at all to stop
spillage.
In two thousand nineteen has as
my expert Mario Atencio spoke
fifty thousand gallons of
produced water spill that leaked
into the chopper watched we're
Navajo community still have
unanswered questions about the
safety of their drinking water
in twenty twenty one of the
individuals who wanted to speak
today many of coin and her
family were open in the middle
of the night to an explosion
they were drenched in produced
water ultimately losing their
chickens goats and their dog.
It was so contaminated they were
not they were told not to eat or
or eat anything grown from it
what I'm looking for here is
transparency.
Ability protection of both the
quantity and the quality of our
water.
That's why this bill is
necessary.
Thank you senator and thanks for
your commitment to this issue I
mean this is while you you
really follow this I guess you
know big picture you know how
hard it is to get by and from
both environmentalists and
industry it seems like I forty
six for all of its flaws with
the start in that direction so
what would you say to the
opponents and said you're that
you're we're not giving we are
not if we pass this bill you're
not giving we are not giving the
the up the industry chance to to
follow follow the legislative
lead and and so forth I mean if
you if you followed
I'm sorry did you feel I'm done
I'm done but you get my point
just trying to understand this
yeah absolutely if you followed
Mr norm grounds chart which you
will see is there are some good
actors and some really bad
actors with this bill will do
was put them all on the same
footing and provide a level
playing field because the bad
actors are responsible for most
of this bills.
And the other thing that I
noticed and I followed up on is
several people have said well if
we do this I believe Liz
anyway different people said if
we if we were to do this they
would move to Texas so I
researched Texas law and in fact
they regularly produced water
certainly more stringently than
we do.
and so that that was fascinating
to me.
I always say we should be open
for business but not opened for
play exploitation and I believe.
Mr chair Senator that this area
is becoming a way some or what
is known as a sacrifice them.
In that it it this bills are
going to make it impossible to
grow anything there this built
in danger the water table there
they Navajos are upset naturally
because of the of the rated the
this built in the chopper
watched and there was no
consequence no accountability
and they the company that ruins
the farm of penny a point came
the next day and they scraped up
her top soil from reform.
They never informed her what was
in that top soil and we know
that there's naturally occurring
radiation that might explain the
paas tools they got on their
skin.
Mr chair Senator we need
transparency and accountability
in order to protect our water
thank you senator and thanks for
get for your commitment to this
and I'll listen to the debate
thank you your answer my
question.
Thank you so.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman I'm are looking at
the F. I. R..
And as I. read I. R..
Well so the cost of this though.
Will be
One seven million dollars over
the each of.
Each of the second and third
year fiscal years now.
Well that approximate Rio Costa
I'm assuming that would continue
out of the two point seven
million further about five point
five million.
Five one five six million
dollars could you
chairman and center city this
project budget.
Well.
I.
I believe OCD needs needs
additional resources to do what
they're asked to do now.
There was no appropriation with
with the built with the produced
water is that it exists now so
they had to do it on top of
everything else they have to do
and they did it they started the
rulemaking process and they're
doing it but they do they only
what I believe I don't even know
how many they have now but the
last time I checked they had
eight inspectors for over fifty
two thousand wells.
They need additional resources
and I believe we should get them
if this bill passes I'm
committed to give my junior
money to that effort.
I appreciate the offer but I
don't I don't know two hundred
twenty thousand dollars is is
going to make much of a dent in
In in five point seven million
dollars of of expenses well.
But.
Mr Mr chair of Senator we're
always asking our agencies to do
more with less I have a bill the
procreation bill to appropriate
more to both OCD and to the
environmental Department they
don't have enough resources to
do the job under current law and
they already are responsible for
implementing the current
produced water act this and
they've already started to try
to trace the water because what
they realize is that it is very
very dangerous to not have any
idea where the source of the
water the the water is I have
heard stories because there's
not sufficient resources in the
engineers in the state engineers
office that these transfers from
farming which I think should be
our highest use of water to to
produced water had been
occurring without the normal
approval process.
It just been occurring under the
table that is very frightening.
We need additional resources and
I completely agree with the FIR
that we need additional
resources no additional
resources were at our ever added
when we add additional duties
and but I'm going to work very
hard to see that we can help
agencies do their job.
And I and I and I and I hear a
commitment to that and I and I
do appreciate that might you
know and and that's something
that I.
It's something we all need to do
I'm not sure I'm not sure that
we support agencies.
By by asking them to do things
that outside the oil House.
R. I. I find it significant that
that there's no evidence
secretary president and that
there's no.
no agency person
present at this at this time I
do have some questions on we met
with the agency several times
Seville office please don't
interrupt a member while they're
speaking I'm sorry I thought it
was done I apologize Senator
it's it's hard with someone or
some political work cautiously
in one of Senator has a question
for you we'll try to make it
clear it's a question directed
to otherwise the senators so
speaking and I can cost non
center I'm.
What was chairman and and
senator I do have a couple
questions for you actually and
and so my questions began on
section to.
All of the bill and they go back
to section one I'm I'm still
trying to process the enormity
of the of the amendment that was
provided.
Today
and I just want to double check
to see.
I don't think there's a whole
lot in.
Section two that was amended
just now but I do see that that
you have
Up.
One of the favorite phrase
favorite prices here in
Judiciary Committee not
withstanding I'm I'm looking at
the.
US subsection B. section two and
I'm I'm actually looking at the
moment and context
is that what I can to try to
track the amendments that were
already done on this bill and
and so you strappedwith not
listed in the civil the only
limitations
subsection B. of seventy dash to
dash thirty one person funding
violations of section.
In accordance with the
proceedings of that section
seven liable for civil penalty
in the following amounts.
So are
there in a practice last year.
How much would have been with
them
suss.
Actually so we have to multiply
of.
And I'm not sure I will defer to
my experts
it to see if.
either normal or do you have an
idea of how many I know norm
created a chart.
Mr Chairman Senator Ivey Soto.
I could easily calculate that
for you I have not done that
yet.
Okay I'm not.
I'm.
Your question I have Senator
Sedillo this is is that what you
say
Some to the.
Seizures.
Provided for in seventy two dash
thirty one.
in the procedures of seventy.
Seven dash to the US thirty one.
We have
administrative penalties.
We also have point assessed I
don't use.
You don't make clear which.
We're going to be quite assessed
over these be administratively
assessed and probably not.
Well.
Thank you Mr chair the way I
read this in the way I
understand it and all I I will
also work defer to Gail Evans
but the way I read this is the
seven the seventy two if you
remember seventy dash to just
thirty one has a limitation on
penalties I believe it with ten
thousand dollars and the point
of not just in the civil penalty
limitations is what we're trying
to say because ten thousand
dollars is simply a cost of
doing business business so if
the civil penalties that pin up
of these penalties I imagine had
been of assessed with the
drenching for hours of the
pharmacy where it would have
been much much more than ten
thousand dollars and certainly
more the idea here and this was
actually we met with the agency
several times and one of the
things that OCD told us is that
they to make sure that the
penalties were not simply the
cost of doing business.
And the other point that I
wanted to make an in response to
what you didn't ask me a
question but I want to make in
response is we also talk to OCD
because my original idea was to
try to give them an incentive to
actually enforce and and I
wanted the money to go back into
the OCD coffers and they said no
no that wouldn't work under the
constitution we you cannot
create an incentive we need and
and then the director of of the
environmental department said no
we don't want what we don't want
we want general funds we want
money that we can count on not
just what goes up and down with
fines and so that of that's why
the fines here go to increase
transparency and to provide them
with the tools necessary to
provide data on their website
that would not have.
I understand about section three
I haven't gotten to section
three Sanchez.
Okay let me ask my experts Gail
Evans from the New Mexico
environmental law center to see
if she has anything else to add.
Senator Ivey Soto and chairs of
Montes I would just start by
saying that right now US bills
are not illegal in New Mexico so
right now there's no penalty
imposed if there is a spill and
that would also be in response
to senator meals question
earlier about why is this bill
necessary that's one of several
gaps in the law that this bill
is seeking to close so that we
can properly manage oil and gas
wastewater
and in terms of whether this
would be a civil penalty so if
there is a spill
it then that amount of this bill
would be assessed by the oil
conservation division and a
penalty imposed I agree with you
Senator Ivy Soto that currently
the way that section of the law
is written seventy dash to dash
thirty one isn't the clearest
piece of law that I have ever
read it appears that there could
either be a civil action started
in the court for
a temporary cessation cessation
and that and administrative
penalty imposed I would suspect
it would be handled
you know through regulation and
through
He an assessment by the
department and and the payment
and I and I and I hear that but
what I what I notes in this
subsection the witcher exempting
yourself from.
Is that is that under the
current structure and this was
in this is an essential part of
the two thousand nineteen
amendments to the oil and gas
act allowed to the penalties
aspect.
Is that is that the the
department is able to
administratively SS up to two
hundred thousand dollars
translation of Bill and gas at
if they want to go abroad two
hundred thousand dollars Senator
but.
Yourself from that limitation so
that's what I say it's unclear
to me as I read this one act of
courts or whether they can
administratively assessed three
million dollar.
penalty against against a
violator based upon the
provisions you have in section
two of the act and so and so
that is of some some concern to
me also I would just say eight
on the sevens that that I hear
you very clearly that that what
you're trying to in fact most of
the of the people who supported
this bill would have reached out
to me their shorthand in terms
of why should support this bill
is is that spirals should be a
violation on sept
that prevent actual if you
weren't next those of Irish the
oil and gas are you.
That as one of the things that
would be a violation.
Very straightforward and simple
but not snap and this bill dots
and that's the thing and the
sponsor of the bills and stuff
that is not and that this bill
dots and and and different lines
are.
It is that is that
is that is the talking point has
been spent on should be mailed
are wrongful of the nearly gas
acts.
What is going to be a small.
What this bill to us and and so
returning back to the program
going on subsection are will be
of the bill.
It is we have then
we have what we're where you
have your creating a non
reverting fund.
R. as in Robert half to have
data compilation.
And and and that's why we
question rise how much money
would have been raised.
Right because because the in
order to do data compilation
your although you're not
creating the division as an
enterprise fund rocketing the
data compilation as as a bit of
an of an enterprise and I'm
wondering how much would be
raised because it's you know I'm
impregnate your general money.
Probably our system division in
terms of their compilation in
terms of the needs for doing
that I think two hundred
thousand dollars is probably
initiatives for them to sign up
and modernize revisions online
databases and that to increase
public accessibility to the
division's data on the
division's webpage part
technological upgrades the
division's databases and web
page on manta this is a fund
that's going to be sitting there
with with eighteen million
dollars on what is what is
needed in order to do our data
compilation.
And Senate and so I'm not sure
that there's an access.
Funds are being imposed an
inspection tour of the bill.
There are pros are still
unclear.
And that's actually needed and
restricted amount of use
operating at the purpose in
terms of of of data compilation
and we're backed up money
critically I'm not not I could
easily be done through a
particular Senators are you
money and so and so and that's a
nonrecurring parents are less
that one of them gets locked
there can be used for any other
purpose on Sunday we decide to
read the fund and the budget was
set a standard provisions of
that section we're gonna take
money used for the purposes that
and then at some point I was
gonna say you got a pandemic.
Arm and and so.
One of the other thing is I will
note that while a state may not
be a direct violation of the oil
and gas act the failure to
report the spill certainly is is
part of federal amount of state
law but it's it's a violation of
federal law at the same time and
and so on and the reason report
the the this bill is to ensure
that there's appropriate
remediation that that takes
place on with regard to to the
the effects of a spill out that
happens.
To our the section of the bill
money and I see that you're
stroking and was a section B..
Yes fracking paragraphs fifteen.
that's what it appears that
you're relieving.
The provision of a regular in
this position handling
transports for recycling
chairman of this president
produced water.
Our in order to protect public
health the environments and
fresh water resources.
Our.
You're also relieving them of
the responsibility to regulate
the construction operation of
treating plants president Moncef
reclamation.
Regular in the best position on
domestic I mean this this seems
to the seems to be.
What's part friends about the
valgus Association as as opposed
to the system what you're what
you're looking Division State
Street quite a gift to the on
gasification are in terms of the
various different things that
that that that they're no longer
be regulated on our and you
there are there are very
regularly disposition on
domestic water resulting from
the exploration development
production our our revert to
normal natural gas to regulate
the disposition on domestic
waste resulting from the old
field service industry
transportation run natural gas.
Recently in senator right right
regularly we have regulated
number twenty two related to
this position on.
You know produced water and
which actually made it very
clear that this must be
regulated messed off on and on
in that in that process but but
but instead all of that is being
then removed and that's what we
have what that we're doing it
what do you see the excuse me
objection to.
Which is which is that you're
not asking them to be
responsible for making members
of the orders with rather more
live domestic campaigns are on
other crucial best of best
available science technology and
I think a property that part out
remember last a lot of domestic
animals which is not in there
then we house right now and and
then and then you've got a
variety of New.
Areas of a regulation here that
that happens hi I'm.
Also
Confusing a couple places such
as paragraph we're program.
So we.
Where in the merriment.
There are there are you your
having the location of produced
water and recycle produced water
and miss more because I looked
at your definitions of finding
respond recycled produced water
means the same thing.
And so I'm sorry your prior
tracking and reporting of the
exact same thing under different
names but the action in the same
thing and on the same
definition.
and and so
it is.
Are
That is the somewhat somewhat
concerned about about frankly
the ability to talk about the
ability of the agency to have
the resources.
To program their mission and
yet.
The changes you're during to the
mentioned at this point.
His parents substantial and and
you're gonna be giving them
three months to completely
recalibrate.
One time and see in terms of in
terms of our of the various
different things that you're
that you're asking them.
Ought to do in terms of of this
integration of of our our powers
and so
That's that's a that's a
a concern for me I'm also
looking at subsection seed.
president
subsection C..
Our.
Our.
And.
And and at the end of this works
provided that is prohibited to
construct operate treating
plants are produced water
recycling treatment plants in a
manner that resulted in water
pollution I'm not I'm not what's
what's the standard.
Our Senator delivers what's the
standard of million results
what's the tyrants for may
result in more pollution.
I believe that the agency is
fully capable of looking at the
path plants and evaluating
whether the plant is leaking or
is is so faulty in its design
that it wouldn't get may result
in water pollution.
That would be agency discretion
since that that this is one of
the agency responsibilities.
Which is different from what's
in the bill.
And so and and likewise see I.
The management disposition on
domestic wastes resulting from
express Development production
storage.
Well natural gas provided it is
prohibited to dispose of non
domestic wastes.
And our.
That may result in pollution I
guess I guess my concern about
may result in water pollution
is is that is that.
That's a that's a that's that's
a that's a promise.
That is.
For vagueness and that and that
gives rise to arbitrary and
capricious regulatory.
Our enforcement at the same
time.
Because I candidly
you know.
And may result in our education.
And and I'm sorry yes yes I'm
staying here.
About the problems that you
mentioned for the struggle.
Well since the agency in terms
of of what the tolerance and
what the criteria are in terms
of the results and as used in
both of these sections.
Is.
Or.
With what the.
The work the box once here you
know this was concerning
we have a problem as you can see
in a situation.
Where we're we're instead of
attention Rosselli.
And also progressively Act of
nineteen eighty based on a
virtual business standard that
you're applying in statute
what's the may need to figure
out how to write the rules.
And so that's our that's a a
That's our that's a that's a I
just think that's a significant
problem you have the exact same
thing in in programs some of
them aren't where you have that
it's it's prohibited use pets in
a manner that may result in
pollution I Representative
that's possible.
Mr chair that would not result
in more pollution I mean I I
just I just don't think that is
I don't think that is.
It's that that is possible.
Are
How.
All of that that would certainly
not Representative in water
pollution at least this one you
have you have the product you
know the sense of the and that
at a minimum include
requirements providers the
detection
you know the at the other
various different things but it
is I mean your your your your
generous.
Instruction regarding the
direction.
Are you to the to the
Department.
As as they are they are doing
that I mentioned into this
sharing of at the moment so
could you pass and and tell me
which bill is.
We are working on their way yes.
What would your microphone is
open.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Response from from from the
sponsor.
My question thank you you know
to be honest I was in and out
because they needed a quorum is
in the back so I tuned into
staff to try to give them a
quorum but I feel a lot of
confidence in both in both of my
experts to be more specific the
parts that I did here I want to
say that may is commonly used in
statute in particular is in in
the air quality could I mean the
water quality control act so I.
I just disagree with that right
there and I was also sort of
surprised that you went through
the bill like that because you
didn't do that with the produced
water bill which if you want to
talk about void for vagueness as
you pointed out just in in
critiquing whether it's a civil
or toward fine if you if you
ever or tweet matter if there is
ever a bill that is void that
was it and I didn't recall that
you have that's been complaining
however I will defer to my
experts who I know we're paying
very close attention I'll defer
first to
to Mr gone.
Mr chairman I just wanted to say
that
in the conference committee.
Of the bill that came out that
was passed into law.
Maybe all the regulations we
issued by the oil conservation
division discretionary they may
regulate.
The regulations require the
environment department to
redistribute produced water were
mandatory.
Items that came out of the
section B. that you referred to.
We're making mandatory stand the
following section C. precursors
of crucial importance.
And I believe that thirty eleven
cents other observations with
regard to questions certainly
and and and probably gonna get
this put on the Saddam that the
that that that that name is used
in a variety of different
contexts the contacts that you
use there was a very different
context that that that need to
be aware of the agency as
opposed to instruction to the
agency and that's a different
that's a different context of
the COVID what happens is Evans.
Thank you chairman Cervantes and
Senator Ivy Soto I I I I do
think that point really needs to
be clarified Senator Ivy Soto if
you look at
page.
Let's see that the parts of the
bill that you were saying so we
start on page five.
The that said there's a
subsection B. E. and in statute
right now that seventy dash to
dash twelve be.
And that is rulemaking authority
for the oil conservation
division and that entire section
says of the oil conservation
division may make rules and
orders for these purposes it
does not say that they shall
make rules and orders which is
really a shocking and central
point to this bill we do not
have a law on our books in New
Mexico that mandates the
regulation of oil and gas waste
in our state we have a law that
says the oil conservation
division may regulate but it
doesn't say that they have to
and so what this bill does is it
lists those very sections that
you were referring to saying why
doesn't oil and gas just love
this because we're saying no
regulation has to occur far from
it what we've done is lifted
those sections and created a new
section in law which starts on
page nine which says the
division shall make rules and we
pulled out from the
discretionary rulemaking section
all the parts that seemed
relevant to oil and gas liquid
waste management and we put them
in a shallow section because we
need a statement from our
legislature that oil and gas
waste shall in fact be managed
and then in that section we said
those rules shall be written
it's no longer discretionary it
must happen and those rules must
be written considering the best
available science and they must
be written in order to protect
our environment.
Our freshwater resources and our
public health we currently do
not have a law on the books that
says that that's why this law is
so important it is not just
about spills not even close it
is about ensuring that we have
oil and gas liquid waste
regulation and management in our
state and considering that over
fifty billion gallons of
produced water is made every
year in our state and we right
now don't have a law on the
books saying what's going to
happen to them it is a large gap
in the law and we don't want to
just leave this to the executive
agency discretion at a
rulemaking procedure we will.
The mandates it I we sort of
lost appeal of your question.
Yeah I think so too and and and
and and and and the bank has
missed Evans you can just simply
at the beginning subsection be
struck the work may answer the
word channel as the US and
respectfully that the Soto and
statements are Montes I disagree
because we left the some of the
rulemaking discretionary because
we thought we would get even
more opposition so what we did
is we kept it focused on oil and
gas liquid waste and oil so the
liquids because that was the
spirit and the intent we hope of
Original produced water act that
was passed and there was
there was an insertion in the
original produced water acted
talk about protecting fresh
water resources and the
environment it was in one place
in the law.
This very
much trying to address the
direct question is direct
questions please on.
Senator Ivey Soto yes certainly
so what let me try asking the
right question.
Yes those sections.
Representative those sections
issue actually.
I mean I'm I'm I'm looking at
the language that was struck.
Subsection be analytical engine
subsection C. and there are not
the same way.
They are the same with some
additions so I believe there are
three new mandatory rulemaking
provisions that were not in the
old law and in each of those
provisions it's inserted that
these things will be done in a
way so as not to we need to work
for pollution and I L. U. which
provisions are renewable and
which are old if that would be
helpful I'm seeing that use
three you're right and then
started seven.
And if you certainly want to
date what was there you could
simply.
One of those down in the you
could amended all of them.
Simply mandated those three are
again like I think this movie
could have been a very simple
bill in many ways and and and
and I'm very frustrated that
it's not very simple bill.
Because because
what has not that.
Are the emails I've gotten about
the bill of people who who would
like to right from you to
support this bill
the talking points of that of
all the talking points out there
but.
And so on
I'm sorry so it it it's it's
this on I'm I'm I'm just
incredibly frustrated as I go
through this bill right now and
it and I see and I say things
that are in fact.
What was what what what is is
contained in the program better
than three hundred emails.
On this topic
In June and and and I'll I'll
skip subsection.
subsection however has not focus
of sections five and six for a
second.
The end of a section seven and
our you know you also
The the the rules.
Administered by the pond
Department now we're switching
departments here.
and that and you know the the
the effect of these.
Are all of these rural sites are
and are you know I think it's
it's again it is it's it's a
real concern you know center
city office you.
It is not going to the other
bill.
One of the actually the bill of
from our end and I think that
resulted in in some if you
recall because because because
your life depended some of us on
the floor resulted in some
tournaments and resulted in
going through parts of the bill
but the thing is still on as
several prominent about we had
we had industry we had to
advocates and we had agencies
are reporting much on the same
page and and so are.
That was turned into some parts
of the bill went out a couple of
deficiencies and others are
deficiencies.
but but unless it gets extra
credit I think a real problem
I'm.
this is backed up to section one
for just a second Representative
was chairman of the number of my
questions and that it was I'm so
sorry and then to section one.
Which means for us while
drilling and developments that's
lower than fresh water.
An operator shown use produced
water.
Whatever treated water in little
flash Water.
What is how do you how do you
get.
I I guess I guess I'm concerned
about that because.
Even things madam I came out of
the testimony today are right
well I think this is this is
part of what you're trying to
address by the managements are
apart from the vagueness on on
some of that in the and then
defined terms is that is that
your right now I mean in order
to get the fresh more area they
need to use crosswalk.
Produced water recycled water
treated water into fresh water
in order to get within the
project more
I definition intended in the
fresh water but but the other
thing is that I that I I find
problematic with with the
department statement is used
here is that is that it was
concerned that there may be
limits.
What are are.
What you give them is that
they're not human mistrust
Walker.
In order to cast the leaks are.
At the present time.
Read this that's not a real
problem.
Then then use of the section
you're forcing readers to
introduce produced water
recycled water from water not
just our our our fresh water or
I and I just I just don't think
that's the proper public policy
for the state of New Mexico are
to be doing that I think we
should encourage operators to
work for weeks are in there
intertwines our and our so in a
way that is going to be
introducing what is effectively
a pollutants into our the fresh
water our leaders ideas or bus
and so on you know I I Senator
Sedillo Lopez hi my next
appreciate your passion for
this.
And and I'm and and the work
that you've done on this I just
think that that this program a
fairly simple bill.
Spells and.
With with with regulatory
mandates.
In the law and and and frankly I
think that would benefit I I
well we're gonna build more when
I would been
non responsive to to to to other
people's intimate concerns that
would be based as and I don't
have any concerns with the Mets.
Thanks as well
no one beyond beyond our the
stores aspects and it does so in
a way that the appears to to
stick to.
Become a fracking ban on the
state of New Mexico our and and
and also to to put our agencies
are in a real and real dilemma
they don't have enough resources
already and and from Leslie
expanding access mandating
additional work within their
school but but expanding their
scope of responsibility side of
their areas of expertise Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Senator I'm looking at the
twenty to see others who wish we
recognized on the bill is not by
then.
The other committee members
were questions or discussion.
Well we we would take your
motions are more so I was like
that my comments for I heard
this bill of course Senator
Sedillo Lopez and conservation
are buying up could not support
in there for some of the same
reason we talk by that someone's
already here today I appreciate
the fact the tried to amend
section but let me revisit that
reduce the minute section one is
really the heart of the bill it
says oil and gas has the
restriction requirement recent
rains water recycle water is as
rolling gas grown dollars you
know what.
My concern at the top rated
committee yes No wrecked me bye
yes by by eliminating the words
protected freshwater resources
on the limited what protected
resource all I I I appreciate
that because my observation of
conservation Brady was
reaffirmed by the state
engineers office which is they
had some understanding they
don't have actually what that
meant.
I'm still up with this problem
which is that we're trying to
figure out how this law is going
to be applied and enforced it
would it would apply when there
is oil and gas drilling
involvement lower than with your
fresh water.
I guess the question here is
certainly there's got to be what
we consider this issue has to be
a proximity factor doesn't there
in other words you know what
you're saying this this
restriction applies when you're
drawing lower than fresh water
fresh water where fresh water in
as our particular distance or
we're counting your particular
offer firm or the way it's
worded right now is any oil and
gas drilling Development lower
than fresh water fresh water
where is really the question in
my in my missing something here
what we just have one question
when we say you're drilling
lower the fresh water during the
religious freshwater did I wear
that fresh water level would be
measured.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
that's why we added on page
eleven one eleven two subsection
eight to implement the fresh
water use prohibition and oil
and gas drilling and development
has said endorsed previously
this act and to specify
procedures under which a waiver
may be sought from this
requirement upon application to
the OCD because what your
concern revealed to us is there
is fresh water in lakes there
are fresh water in no there's
fresh water and underground
streams there's fresh water in
aquifer's there's fresh water
has it it throughout throughout
the basin in different areas and
so we felt that this is
something that the it should be
a general prohibition but
because but your point was well
taken and so it is a general
prohibition with the possibility
of a waiver from OCD which has
the expertise to help you know
to assure and work with industry
to make sure that they are not
it risk as I as I've said many
times the good actors in this
area do not have a problem these
with these regulations because
they already and here to these
are best practices.
Thank you for that no one no one
who's a good actor.
Should have a problem with this
thank you we work very closely
Mr gong has incredible
experience with this he has many
contacts with industry industry.
Reached out.
Read to support this bill but
they did have input receive
this all might my concern my
topic which again you would not
have project that that and you
know what is fresh water
you're right can be on the
surface it can be really at any
at all your and that's why I
said earlier my money there
should be some kind of proximity
in other words fresh fresh water
where in the Hey miss our fresh
water levels in canals or Los
crucis there there's an
ambiguity there and and it
really is one of my goals you're
on the legislature to avoid just
creating opportunities for
litigation because ultimately
that as you and I both know
eight years and years of of
delay we see these water
environmental lawsuits thank you
know can cases that back by
thank you for the court appeals
and Supreme Court may take a
decade are to resolve and I'm I
would really prefer to avoid
that one other just a different
topic
The the bill I disagree with
center I was sort of this could
be a simple bill but when I look
at it it looks like in the title
it's not just relating to the
oil and gas our production board
exploration but if I look at the
title on on the first page one
seventeen it also says non
domestic weights will relates to
on non domestic waste and I see
that language added also we're
in the bill so if you look but
that but then we look at section
two this is a prohibition on.
Other this all new material on
domestic weights and says
resulting from the exploration
drilling or production of oil
and gas so here were you know
what we're of limiting what with
the non domestic waste but might
my concern is that as it's used
elsewhere in the bill the bill
was seem to have a regulation
about these four
what what is being described
here is not the best equates
here's my concern my concern is
of course the best example in my
district I got seven carries in
my district they all use a great
deal of water alright Gary
operations the cap the cattle
are all washed carefully cleaned
and all the equipments were lot
of water generate all to the
look.
That that you can use this very
appropriations and my concern
here is that that we're by using
terms as broadly as non domestic
weights
that would that would capture
very agriculture another
wastes are in in use of water
associate with your your
agriculture uses.
I don't think that's your
attention to this bill isn't.
No Mr chair non domestic of oil
and gas industry
The other point that I wanted to
make with regard to what you
said about fresh water where
it's at the location of drilling
that's that's really clearly in
the regulations I think it's
important that that people
understand that we're not just.
Creating a law in the absence of
a context is it's on the in the
axe is
it's in the context of
regulation and standards and
business and business standards
and business
capacity.
Thank you senator all right miss
Coyle is waste resulting from
oil and gas on page three near
the top as I look at it.
All the questions that are I are
presented in this.
Any other committee members with
discussion or questions or K.
they're more stressed direct
lines promotion.
Any other discussion or debate.
Senator Stewart discussion of
the bank.
Yes.
You Mr chair so.
You know very very torn on this
bill I understand the concerns I
I hear them loud and clear.
I am really bothered that we
don't let the loss we passed to
take the fact I mean we've only
finished the rulemaking of for
this produced water operations a
few months ago I've read and re
read the FIR we don't have one
state agency who thinks we need
to be doing this now
I believe the industry they
really need to focus on
recycling their waste and to
reduce their fresh water
consumption we have a produced
water consortium that's working
with New Mexico state we we have
all these processes in place and
yet you know we want to change
everything so you know I really
think that.
This is a danger to the industry
this bill and it's not supported
by any of our agents state so I
just have a hard time moving
forward and I'm doing the kind
of work that we've done the last
few years so that's all Mr
Chairman just my comments thank
you.
Representative many other
committee members with the
discussion.
Senator Morris had a motion
thank you Mr chairman foods
table.
Questions not available by roll
call Emily would you go through
the committee please and roll
call the motion is to table
Senate bill eighty as amended.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator.
Senator Stewart you're still
muted I know I can I muted
unmuted myself ten times now in
the last two seconds yes.
Yes.
Senator this yes.
Senate bill eighty six table by
the committee.
the next matter on the agenda
Senate bill one fourteen thank
you Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator o'neill Senate bill one
fourteen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee
All right into it Senate bill
one fourteen yes
Would update the procedures for
requesting evaluating request
for early parole based on
inmates advanced age.
For medical history integrity
Medical infirmity get this bill
was a joint for a lot went into
this bill with the corrections
department in the sentence
commit sentencing commission and
the parole board and and so that
outlines a process that the
corrections Department should
follow sets deadlines to review
of applications and and
basically is doing what the
current parole board is doing
and a lot of ways right now but
it's really important bill and
it's just you know again it's
it's the result of a lot of
collaboration between
corrections parole sensing
Commission it's our and so with
that Mr chairman and I have
hopefully my expert Douglas
carver here if you want to add a
minute summary and then we can
go to
Public comments and then of
course to the committee so
Douglas did you want to
summarize.
thank you senator neon thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'll be quite brief
due to the lag between getting
me on and showing the live feed
I apologize if I repeat anything
that Senator rodeo just set of
this bill came out of a effort
of the sentencing commissions
reform committee with many of
you know I believe was reformed
two years ago to work on our
mandate of introducing.
This reforms to the three
branches of government it was
Endorsed by the reform committee
endorsed as well by the full
sentencing commission and as a
reminder the sentencing
commission includes members of
that.
Appointees from the district
attorney's of the corrections
department the
Half point the bears public
members members of both parties
appoint members of the attorney
general's office victims
advocates hello PED it's a true
cross section of the criminal
justice system in the state.
The efforts to reform geriatric
medical parole procedures have
been going on for many years
back when I was with council
service that work on some
initiatives that Senator o'neill
had introduced those earlier
reforms usually get tied up in
larger probation and parole
reform and end up failing
because they go down with the
ship of the bigger probation
parole reforms so therefore
committee thought this year
would be advisable to just to
send the straight probation and
parole medical geriatric
probation parole reform bill
through thank you Douglas that's
great so as we go to go to the
You know in support of the bill
I think we strive for equipment
and so forth.
Public comment.
We have about that seven minutes
Senator
we got it for eighteen I I show
on your list of proponents
of Business Cerro with the
cabinet secretary Mexico
corrections department also have
Rikki Lee Chavez with the
defense lawyers and then Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of public defender you still
have about the as I said six or
seven minutes if you'd like to
rank yes yes in just advocates I
mean for those in support please
keep your comments to two
minutes by my math that comes
out to six minutes this was
there are you on the ball not
available.
Business Sheryl.
All right Mr this lawyers
followed by ms Chavez Cook
public defender.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the criminal
defense lawyers association we
want to thank the sponsor his
advocates the department and Mr
Carter with the sentencing
commission we stand in strong
support of this bill IT I
appreciate the time limitations
Mr chair because I do want
Senator o'neill to provide you
with all of that information and
Mr Carter however I just wanted
to know that this is a great
step for our criminal justice
reform system we're talking
about eliminating the use of
private prisons limiting
incarceration and this is a
really important part of that
piece and so for those reasons
we encourage your support as
well thank you your job growth.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you Senator of the offer
carrying this bill I was on the
reform committee that Mr Carter
described and we had a just one
of the easiest path to consensus
on this bill everyone agreed it
was the right thing to do I
wanted to highlight that the LFC
in twenty eighteen issued a
report that wrecked one of the
recommendations those report on
performance at corrections and
one of their recommendations
right up front at the beginning
of the report was to consider
amending this statute
specifically to require
corrections to evaluate inmates
on on their own and identify
those who were eligible for
medical in geriatric parole
submit that list to the parole
board for consideration and this
bill is responsive to that
recommendation by LFC and the
reason why that's so important
is because of the medically in
geriatric Lee infirm inmates are
in the least good position to
advocate for themselves on this
and self identify and so we do
think that this is going to make
that early release possible for
more people and to save the
taxpayers money because those
end of life costs are currently
borne by the corrections
department and it allows people
to spend their final days at
home with family so we support
this for every reason and really
encourage folks to vote for it
thank you so much.
I was but us Senator o'neill the
committee has been notified that
bass that the cabinet secretary
provincial cracking Department
Mr Boyle Cheryl had asked to
speak in support she's not join
the call but not because I
really Representative the
committee that she had actual
correction department supports
this bill yes you can Mr
Chairman I think you are
committing committee members we
don't have any organized
opposition to the bill or any
speakers vastly recognized in
opposition we're going to
committee members if you can
help me by just yourself has
right with those which the
speaker asked questions of Bill
Gates on my list new members
Senator Ivey Soto many others.
All right Sir Ivy Soto who do
best.
I'll be very quick Senator don't
think you so much reading this
it's great to have
of Bill the service you
procedures involvement with the
cabinet secretary's been
consulted and has expressed
political AC on and on page
three line eighteen corrections
department shall promulgate
rules and implement this program
and and it is with them there
will house and I find this to be
a very clear bill and and what
the collaboration that would
like to see one does come before
us thank you very much thank you
thank you projects that of
course with the motion and the
others with questions or
discussion on the proposed bill.
Thank Senator Moores you had a
motion to pass please Mr chair.
Your any objections the
committee members not present to
a do pass motion on the Senator
the.
You see no objections Emily
would you record all committee
members present
voting in support.
You have a new path Center
o'neill thank you Mr chairman
members.
The matter up this bill to sixty
six Senator Ivy Soto.
Staff.
Usual terms.
About Mr chairman.
We are just as as part of an
omnibus bill I have the staff
right from the judicial terms in
there that was challenged in the
state Supreme Court Supreme
Court said you can't quite get
there from here without amending
the constitution so we amended
the constitution constitution
having been amended are we now
bring Senator to sixty six
before you in order to deal with
stabbing additional terms
right now ninety six district
judges are on the ballot at the
same time this is not healthy
for the judiciary it's not
healthy in terms of the
protection of government
especially given that to be
retained in need to have fifty
seven percent on which means of
somebody's able to garner forty
three point one percent of the
vote against all the judges are
around the state the entire
match arm will be will be wiped
out in addition to that the
if there are more at the same
time in the larger counties that
I say counties that tends to our
cloud up the power by adding a
number of additional ballot
questions especially in
Bernalillo county when you have
that spot accord  at the same
time is just report which
happens once every five years it
had gone to they had that had a
bill to arm.
Two eighteen inch ballots and at
six point four months in order
to accommodate everything on the
ballot and so this will help
with that as well and also make
the work of the judge
performance evaluation
commission easier as it will
stagger their artwork of invalid
the judges instead of having a
tsunami every six years they can
they can do it more consistently
with that we have to stand
questions.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto I see
only one
proponent within your ten minute
current times Cydney Taylor the
common cause is I see Mr Hey I
so say I see a.
I thought I saw there you go I'm
here sorry thank you there's a
bit of a lag thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Sydney yes
I am the associate director with
common cause New Mexico we'd
like to think the bill's
sponsors for bringing forth this
necessary and important
legislation choosing state court
judges is a consequential
decision for voters our state
courts have a profound impact on
our state legal and political
landscapes and in twenty twenty
voters across the state
overwhelmingly supported
proposition to the staggering of
non statewide offices but sixty
four percent of the vote Senate
bill two sixty six not only
allows judges to be placed on
the ballot for retention every
two years but as the sponsor
mention allows for a better
evaluation system of judges
shorter ballot for voters and an
added level of protection for
our judiciary for all these
reasons we ask the committee to
support Senate bill two sixty
six thank you so much.
That is the way we opted by of
any organized opposition to the
Santo two sixty six and then I
would just note for the
committees application that I
have consulted with the
measurements of the courts the
last two plus years on this
issue they're supportive of the
concept and also is very fast
guests from the secretary of
state's office is present if
anybody has the technical
questions.
being no organized opposition
we've heard from the up sponsor
with the advocacy Committee
members with questions for the
sponsor or debate on the bill.
Mr Chairman I think we've all
heard this and rules committee
so it's just you.
Very good you have a motion.
I think Senator just jumped into
how did you passed Senator
question the restored.
Mr chairman I think we should
amend this in some way
somebody's got to have an
amendment to slap on this bill
it's just not fair that we're we
have a bill that's clean I don't
like that.
I'm gonna.
And then if I had the bill
before me I could do an
amendment apparently they don't
have that so Mr Mr chairman pro
tem acho amending that claw us
it's usually about four lines of
solutions to.
Yes.
Thank you Senator Stewart I I
think at the.
Is worth repeating.
And the insured terms an
observation by Senator Ivy Soto
earlier which is you know the
last bill by Senator o'neal had
HSD participation by in support
of we'll.
And well written bill and it
should be pretty apparent folks
one of bills well written and it
has the appropriate
participation from those that
are affected this committee acts
expeditiously it seems to me
that Senator Ivey Soto is
reached out to the Courts AOC
there's no opposition to the
bill from the judges the
reasoning behind it I don't see
any issues so Senator I
appreciate your appropriations
but try as much as I might I
don't have a good amendment for
this so Senator Stewart you
still have the floor do you have
I don't need the floor I was
just joking around with and now
this we are to send rules I
don't think we amended it there
did way no.
Adam is to pass yeah it it came
clean because it had already
been Ivy Soto to.
What are the committee set up to
sixty six.
Senator Moores has a do pass.
Is there any objection to do
past motion on Senate bill two
sixty six.
We please record all committee
members present voting in the
affirmative wanted to pass
entering so do have a due pass
thank you Sir next matter before
the committee the Senate bill
two sixty seven Senator Pirtle.
It thank you Mr chair members of
the committee today I have
before you Senate bill two sixty
seven I'm hoping there's a
gentleman named Kevin very.
Waiting somewhere in the soon
rural.
To help be my expert witness
today but essentially what this
aims to do is is ensure that the
New Mexico mounted patrol
are being law enforcement
officers they do a lot of great
work especially out in our rural
areas helping out our county
sheriff's and and our city
police whenever
their help is needed but because
of definitions throughout in the
way that we define what the law
enforcement officer is.
We inadvertently left them out
and so they're not covered under
some of the insurances available
to do and
basically get the that the
president is a they don't have
the ability to do a lot of the
purchasing that other law
enforcement agencies have
because they're not.
technically law enforcement
under definition so this would
just bring them into definition
put them in that we did not
intentionally leave them out but
since we describe or define the
law enforcement officers a
salaried.
officer and as we all know our
New Mexico mountain troll or
hundred percent volunteer a lot
of user and vehicles
when helping and and assisting
the the law enforcement so this
just brings them in
defines what they are and what
the requirements are to be
amount of control member so with
a simple questions Mr chair.
Thank you Senator.
Just one second please two six
seven.
Did you find Mr very the call
well there you go Mr very hi we
have a lease commitments for you
Sir did you have anything to add
to Senator Pirtle.
You have done yourself Sir Mr
very your muted.
Okay can you hear me now.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee my
name is Kevin very from the
deputy chief of New Mexico madam
patrol.
And so what we are trying to do
with this zoom is have some
consistency among all statutes
on what the definition of law
enforcement is and how that
helps New Mexico madam patrol is
by helping us obtain a O. R. I.
which is the regional regional
agency number by having an
originating agency number
mexicana patrol would be able to
apply for and receive federal
grants from the department of
justice.
As Mr Senator program mentioned
all of our funding at all the
stuff we do we pay for ourselves
we're all volunteers we don't
receive state funding we've been
researching the state of New
Mexico for eighty years as of
this year.
Currently we have roughly eighty
five troopers across the state
of New Mexico who work every
weekend with New Mexico state
police local sheriff's
departments and local police
agencies.
Last year well in twenty
nineteen we provided roughly
fourteen thousand hours of
service to the state New Mexico
by assisting law enforcement
agents.
So we are hoping to get the
definition change that we can
get funding for things such as
radios ballistic vest and most
recently with the change last
year during the eight special
session cameras we we we are
requiring all of our officers to
have campers.
Mexico settlement control is not
under the department of public
safety we govern ourselves to
our board through our statute
and we do our best to follow
best practices are Academy our
our troopers go through three
hundred hours of class time
training and they go through
another out a hundred hours of
Field training with the full
time officer our classes are
taught by people like myself who
are a professional lecture to
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy Injectoral policing I'm
also a certified firearms
instructor for New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy.
So we spend a significant amount
of time training our people
right and doing that all on our
own dime and we are hoping to
get the definition of law
enforcement changed and several
statutes so that there is
consistency and so that we can
be defined as law enforcement
with the hope of being able to
get eight are I originating
agency number there are there is
one place in statute we're we
are currently listed in law
enforcement and chapter thirty.
Our goal.
I believe it's chapter thirty
article twenty.
Under the definition of law
enforcement this is in the anti
terrorism act we are listed as
law enforcement.
We're also included in the
survivors benefits for all law
enforcement officers.
Once again the difference
between us and reserve agency it
our reserve officer is that New
Mexico Medical troll does have
training significant amount of
training roughly four hundred
hours and reserve officers do
not have that and we're hoping
that we can get the definition
for law enforcement made to be
consistent with the hope of
getting funding through getting
in R. I. number.
You're a very.
Chair in the we are not advised
of any organized opposition the
legislature will go then to
committee members with questions
for the sponsor.
Many members.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I move that do pass
on Senate bill two sixty seven.
Senator Stewart before I call
for a vote on that is there any
other discussion question
members of the committee on to
sixty seven.
Service so I'll just understand
I don't remember the death
benefits bill I think I hope to
work on that a little bit
so this is consistent with that
also I I really appreciate that
you guys try to be comprehensive
and included not only in in the
places that benefit but also in
the programs act as well so that
so that is the it's universal
definition and so thank you guys
very much for.
for your comprehensive approach
to this.
The other committee members
I have a few questions for is
Senate Pirtle soprano what what
is it to take what are the
qualifications required to
become a member of New Mexico
Monica troll I understand from
the bill there's gonna be a
basic law enforcement training
program would you describe for
me what that program is and then
you can give me any other
qualifications to become a
member of the New Mexico
Montreuil.
Thank you Mr chair at all let
deputy chief answer.
The question.
Thank you Mr chairman so to
become a member New Mexico mask
mounted patrol you have to be at
least twenty one years of age
you have to be a citizen of New
Mexico if you have prior law
enforcement experience you can
lateral over and required those
people who lateral into New
Mexico Madam patrol if they
have.
Left HSD or if they are retired
to go through our policies and
procedures if you are brand new
to launch portion you have to go
through sixteen weekends of
training with our training is
exactly what they do in Santa Fe
or a satellite academy we
received copies of the power
point presentations we received
copies of the course outlines
and the courses are taught by
state people like myself who are
certified as guest lecturers
with the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy in general
police.
We teach our New Mexico law we
teach handcuffing techniques
dependence tactics we we qualify
on the same firearms
qualifications that New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy uses we
teach a thon see taser we also
go over dealing with domestics
dealing with children child
abuse dealing with people who
have mental health I myself am a
licensed mental marriage and
family therapist and my full
time job ari
operating treatment foster care
agency so that's kind of my
specialty New Mexico madam
trolls unique in that we have
people like myself in the middle
health still we have a a surgeon
in Los crucis we have someone
who works as a animal control
officer an artesian so we come
from vast backgrounds but our
training is.
A condensed version of what
they're doing at the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy taught
by professional writers who are
certified by the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy.
Thank you and of course one of
the concerns I'm sure you share
with us all of us of late is the
use of force the appropriate use
of force I assumed all that is
part of the training yes Sir the
patrol officers it is that is
that one of the principal
distinctions between of being a
member of the amount of control
and other law enforcement
agencies the fact the mantra
patrols effectively a volunteer
organization.
Yes Sir we are volunteer law
enforcement organization in the
way that we are unique as to our
knowledge we are the only all
volunteer law enforcement agents
C. by that state statute in the
United States of America and we
have the unique distinction that
we can work with any law
enforcement agency in the state
and and for our statute twenty
nine dash six Best Buy.
This kind of goes along with the
definition of law enforcement is
that we become.
Agents of the agency that we are
working at that time
so that can change from from day
to day I might be working with
the Travis county sheriff's
office today and I can go work
with Roswell police department
tomorrow in either case I have
therefore jurisdiction and their
forty at that time this changing
the definition of law
enforcement does not give us any
more power we still have to be
requested by an agency it just
makes the definition of law
enforcement consistent across
all statutes thank you madam
note also provided the many of
the authorities that we would be
given the you're quitting
authority to make arrests
another law enforcement
activities require for example
before you stop a vehicle the
beginning in the form of office
is that correct number one
number two are there any
circumstances under which New
Mexico might draw operates in
anything other than a full
uniform of office.
Only if we are requested to do
so we have assisted agencies in
plain clothes plain clothes
operations.
But that's only at you're going
to need example of when you
might be asked to perform law
enforcement duties in plain
clothes sure for example when we
were a few years back during the
holidays we were assisting
Roswell police street crimes
unit and a plain clothes
operation to apprehend
shoplifters on Black Friday.
That's a circumstance where this
circumstance I guess it makes
some sense for you to be non
where I'm not wearing uniforms
Office of the Mike my concern is
I think probably pretty obvious
that we we would one be cautious
about authorizing mounted patrol
to be of making up traffic
enforcement right wing over
speeders and doing other things
like that right not a uniform
and without a mark unit but
you're correct the concern great
that would not occur in that
would also not occur in less we
have been requested to do it so
the and that's what I that's
what I wanted to go can
emphasize on the definition of
law enforcement this still does
not change the fact that we have
no authority unless we're
question by any agency so our
our members can not just if I'm
driving to work I can't just
pull over a car because I think
they're speedy.
Even if I have probable cause
because I haven't been requests.
So why the term mounted patrol
just in their origin comes from
mom officers on horseback that
we get yes yes Sir so originally
in nineteen thirty five a group
of ranchers and farmers met in
Santa Fe to assist the newly
formed state police at that time
it was a state more border
patrol they have roughly twenty
Harley Davidsons throughout the
state and so this group of
ranchers decided to assist the
state police.
And they did so for five years
in nineteen forty one governor
miles in the state legislature
legislature decided to put them
into law and at that time yes
you did have to have a force
that was part of our
requirements the amount of
control up until nineteen
seventy two and now Center
forces we are our power and so
we we were we primarily right
with the full time guy is and
provide them in the agency that
they are working for instead of
having one man unit that and
have to send multiple cars to a
to a scene or two a call we
become a two man unit and we're
able to.
Allow
HSD which many of them are short
staffed to not spread their
staff to we're assisting.
Thank you all right thank you
for answering my questions
committee members anyone else
discussion.
But I have a motion for it to
pass yet don't know that I did
I'm saying yes to leave us
Senator Stewart made a motion
Mr with new passed motion.
Is there any objection to the
new passed motion on two sixty
seven.
All right and we will reflect
all committee members who are
present to be voting in the
affirmative center pirtle you
have a do pass on two six seven
thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee I'm so.
Last matter that I believe we
have before the committee today
is to eighty six.
Senator Ivey Soto yes thank you
very much Mr chairman is that
this last bill is
Senator in the special session
this summer we did in a on a
temporary provision dealing with
some rules for the our general
election in the midst of the
pandemic this is a similar sort
of thing if you should we have a
Special option for Congress.
So it basically trunks what we
had been on Senator for doing
that the first national session
with a few changes one is
how to close would be sending I
potentially citrus statement the
kind of products which sums up
and actually for them would be
sending a notice to each of the
runners and then we're gonna
have a and election let in the
know how to get about I mean I
also let them know how to vote
in person it is voting
methodology agnostic
it also does it also does not
maintain the provided a total
health and safety task force
we if you do not operate things
in miss madam and
and and it also requires that
people use the official if
they're going to request a
NASA developed by mail they use
the official form from the
county clerk R. as opposed to
all of these third party
organizations sending out the
applications I am in Mr chairman
I do have an amendment if I
could if this group would be so
kind as to our mission this
morning.
In the Senate rules committee
Senator do it raised raised
issue and senator Morris raised
an issue and seven work with
secretary of state's office in
order to.
respond to those issues and so
on and Emily has a copy of of
this our so what would be in
response to senator do X. our
concern that she had about the
rejection letters if somebody
got something wrong is that are
not K. remember knowledge is
rejected the credit card since
the notes rejection the mailing
address on the worst of the
registration and in different
also to the address listed
members application for mail
ballot that way if the vote was
at a different location they got
the rejection notice there and
one of our that the second was a
concern the senator Morris
raised with regard to the.
Ballots overnight.
And so.
Also tonight and again there's a
this is our temperate provision
goal at two in a special
congressional election in twenty
twenty one but we do have the
option run option board Mr John
bye bye eleven PM election right
his question was one of the
this after that and we told them
what would normally happen he
said is that US practices that
statute yeah it's not this so he
said he would not something
certainly.
Representative people actually
following through so if you
don't complete the work PM on
election at the kind of quick
notifies conditions that it
require the president to secure
the world facility more
uncounted ballots left over that
the general indicates a
definition present available
kind of but not quite secretary
state will request a state run
program additional requested
police department to secure the
ballots that is probably the
official name of their officers
are kind of part of our
supplement as much notice as
practicable New Mexico law
enforcement personnel to secure
overnight a scare on kind of not
so night shots deputies
Department is required for
overnight watch anytime they
have some religion but is not
present until the return of the
action for election board it may
not deputy sheriff arrested
police patrolman is available
the kind of part or chief deputy
shall remain on site this will
incentivize them actually doing
it I'm so over time the have
some support and challenge job
boards over remain present as
well on this maintains the
transparency accountability of
option process models and insure
that people don't get
we're really tired while trying
to process BOROWICZ the primary
I was basically our
infrastructure marginalization
on university in all six
counties five of them have
minimal creasing Station easily
finish on action might this
would primarily applied
Bernalillo county brilliant
funding normally has H.
barbershop deputies posted at
the voting machine warehouse
already so this this would
actually complain about practice
it also includes the policy
behind it in and ensuring that
there's a fail safe just in case
of this problem also note that
the election career and really
has a provision in that that's
the county clerk's office shall
remain open for twenty four
hours
following the close of polls
you're receiving of the garments
well I'm not.
Please and the product is not
available on the dashboard of
that did not receive them so
this whole concept of the county
clerk project operational
remaining is actually not a new
concept within the election code
under such circumstances without
having to I would I would nerve
of the amendment to the Senate
bill twenty six and family as a
copy of that so.
Treatment on our screen
members of the committee let's
first of all address the.
Proposed amendment.
Are there any questions on the
amendment itself.
We the show has anyone
questions.
Hi saying not is there any
objection to adoption amendment.
Senator Pirtle you having to
much fun.
Saying no objection to adoption
the amendment the amendment is
adopted.
Back to the bill center Ivy Soto
you've explained it with the
amendment amendment been adopted
other committee members with
questions or discussion on of
the bill to eighty six as
amended and this can also note
that once again this process
then secretary of state's office
this presentation but having to
tackle questions.
Which were having who present
committee members questions
anyone.
The committee.
For motions Senator Lopez Mr
chairman I move it to pass.
Look at
by Senator yes yes.
There any objection to the do
passed motion.
Seeing family please report all
members as president and that
are present voting in the
affirmative you having to pass
the right to committee chairman
what practically say that that
that there's a reason for the
committee process and these
amendments come directly out of
that reason for the committee
process and have a great
appreciate that this is
something you know I picked up
the bill initially with federal
funds are working for the
repression suggestions made and
and this not only satisfies
Senators doing of course also
Senator Stewart on my minimum
bills and on the
It's available as per policy and
and I very much appreciate it.
Senator Stewart before we
adjourn.
And Mr chairman I just want to
say Senator Ivey Soto for really
paying attention to what people
say about this bill so it's just
I had no idea he was going to do
it those were the issues that
came up so I just appreciate
that he's willing to do that.
We appreciate having the
secretary of state's office
present with us to have some
technical expertise committee
members before we leave of most
of you I think we're here at the
beginning of the meeting we will
be publishing the procedures
that I'm trying to follow as
uniformly as I can one let all
of you know that I conferred
with Senator Pirtle beforehand
as a ranking member I appreciate
his input and advice all taken
from all of you if you see that
these procedures can be improved
upon all of the welcome back but
I hope that you feel that the
very good we do then I hope
you'll share the procedures were
falling as a committee with
others other sponsors and other
advocates for opponents of
legislation so that we are sure
that everyone has a fair up
understanding of our procedures
and and practices this committee
well in advance and can prepare
themselves accordingly by
sending us email comments or
organizing their presentations
so that it can be run
efficiently I I assure you that
you made things easier today for
our zoom host and for the
committee to do things with a
little bit of advance
preparation so thank you there
being no further business before
the committee will see you on
Wednesday and I'll note that
it's just a little before five
o'clock congratulations so Mr
chairman Wednesday were on the
floor well that's a good point
Senator Stewart so what I will
do is I will publish a short of
the general on the chance that
we can get the community waste
in the line so we'll we'll we'll
look for things that are
legislature get usually about
our so we find ourselves with a
three hour or two well well well
get together but otherwise
please be flexible for Wednesday
okay thank you very much.
We'll still have a nice evening.
Thank you.
