Michael sequence but not in the
sequence of hearing assault I'll
try to give you those much I
can't we're more than happy to
track you down if you let us
know where to find you all to do
so so you don't have to wait
around I nothing I dislike more
than sitting around waiting in
the front row for Committee to
get a bill heard so what what I
don't find very much favor with
that the other things that we're
doing a little different here in
Senate judiciary is
We're not just kind of taking
the time we have a dividing it
by people who want to be let in
and giving everybody thirty
seconds or a minute or two
minutes I don't I don't find
that very constructive candidly
to a meaningful debate or
discussion on a complicated
issue so what we're doing in
judiciary is we're giving the
proponent of every bill fifteen
minutes to do with as you wish
that means that it is for you to
control who you have speak we
recognize and how much time you
allow them to speak of their
going on too long it's your job
to cut them off if you have them
scheduled it's up to you to tell
them how long you want them
speaking and hold them to that
it is your show and and for you
to present the the bill in the
most meaningful way that you
choose to do so for that fifteen
minutes if you wish to reserve
any part of that fifty minutes
for rebuttal to the opposition
you're willing you're able to do
that so those of you that are
used to practicing law no this
kind of the way we do things in
court pretty commonly so you can
reserve any part of your fifteen
minutes for rebuttal the
opposition is invited and given
the opportunity to organize
themselves for ten minutes of
opposition if they organize
themselves they may have just
one speaker or wanted to
experience and use the full ten
minutes well to really develop
reasons why they think the
legislation is not is what is
ill advised if the opponents of
the bill are not able to
organize behind a common spokes
person or or program then I will
do what everyone else is doing
all take a number of people in
opposition to give each of them
one minute to oppose the bill
but as I said before I find that
usually very.
Not not as helpful as it is when
somebody has really an
opportunity to fully develop
reasons issues with particular
legislation so I hope that makes
sense to everybody what what I'm
doing
and again the important thing is
that those of the other sponsors
of bills really have a full
opportunities to have our
undivided attention and do with
as you wish what we would do to
control that and sometimes if
you don't control it unit with
one your experts speaking for
ten minutes and leaving not
enough time for the other people
you want to have recognized I'm
counting on you to cut off your
own folks okay.
So that's why we're doing it
we're gonna start up today with
Representative Chasey on
house bill fifty one as amended.
Representative Chasey welcome.
Thank you very much Senator and
Used to be here today my co
sponsor
The president pro tem Senator
Mimi Stewart is on your
committee my experts it.
Is Judy COVID and we will try to
be brief as I would like to give
a couple of minutes if we have
the state land office president
and Energy if.
If they are present I'm not
actually.
Certain that they are but does
the just briefly did that does
the fifteen minutes include the
committees questioning time Mr
chairman.
Not that's that's for you
experts and anyone you want to
recognize or poor but in your
presentation it does not include
committee.
Okay sure all righty thanks so
Mr chairman and members of the
Senate Judiciary house bill
fifty one is the environmental
database act it is that
We say was the kiss of death to
set the circle bill but it
actually is it creates a single
not based website socializing
the state's basic environmental
data it will be searchable by
agencies industries and the
public and includes information.
On just about everything in
Bayern mental branded endangered
species locations of oil and gas
wells data locations of
hazardous waste sites.
As is common can explain there's
actually one like this being
operated in the state but it's
just for one particular
department.
And the beauty of this is just
the user can zoom in on a map
and see an area of interest in
the state and know what's going
on there we amended.
On both costs and energy and
state government to address
concerns by industry and our
concerns about privacy and for
the defining things like
environmental data so with that
I think I would like to turn
this over to a common who is an
attorney with Audubon and this
Madam did a lot of the work on
this in the interim and my co
sponsor is representative
Georgene Louis.
So at the house co sponsors I
don't see her in the.
In the.
All of this works closely with
this comment during the interim
and she did her research hi
Judy.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee and
Judy common New Mexico policy
director for the Audubon society
I'll just add a few things to
what Representative Chasey said
that was a good overview of the
basic idea of the bill but I
wanted to know that the reason
we want to do this right now is
because it's really hard to
figure out the complete picture
of what's going on in the state
and so if you want to know
everything going on in a certain
part of New Mexico you currently
have to take through many
different agency websites to try
to piece it together and this
database would let users zoom in
on a map to an area of interest
and see right away all the
different layers of what's going
on in that place and so all of
this data and stuff that the
agencies are already collecting
and reporting we're just really
talking about consolidating and
on to one map and so this will
help the public and it'll also
help agencies to have a
comprehensive view of what's
happening so for example some
agencies are hiring landscape
level planners right now and and
these people would benefit from
being able to see and easily
searchable map that has other
agency data on it well they try
to make plans and decisions we
did have the state land office I
don't know if they're here today
but they testified in previous
committees about how helpful
this tool would be I'm
Representative Chasey mentioned
we we model this idea on a
similar tool that the game and
fish department already has just
for species data so U. N. M.
currently manages their pool
it's a map of the state and you
can turn different species data
years on and off so what we're
really talking about is a more
comprehensive version of a tool
like that that includes multiple
agency data I'm many other
states have comprehensive map
databases like this and find it
very useful and we did a
presentation on this bill at the
November water and natural
resources interim committee
where somebody from Virginia's
department of conservation came
and sort of gave it to Torio
about their database and showed
how the use that to make agency
decisions that are more
comprehensive.
I'm just an interested being
brief I will say that we did do
some research into who uses
those databases and other states
and also who's using the current
UNM game and fish tool so if
people are interested in that
during questions I'm happy to
talk about the statistics it's
used by a wide variety of
interest groups from industry to
public interest groups to
agencies themselves I'm and
finally I'm just because we want
to consolidate data that the
agencies already have on hand
the process is relatively easy
and inexpensive the sponsors
were able to to provide it with
junior money so we kind of have
that covered it's easy to do
also because the infrastructure
is already in place at UNM since
they're on the game and fish
tool
I think that's all I've got for
now I'm happy to talk about the
amendments that we did in the
house or or any other questions
people have.
So Mister chairman if Senator
Stewart wanted to add anything
this would be a good time to do
that.
Mr chairman I I wanna save the
time for pattern energy for
other people so if you call on
them that this is the time for
them.
All right very good that that
that completes a presentation.
For a.
For house bill fifty one we have
a number of individuals
identified in support.
We still have about a good five
or more minutes for you
Representative so we have a.
Listed Mary Feldblum answer that
ray is Marco Gonzalez Greg
Peters in down Robert let me
first of all check with the web
host to see who we have of that
group.
Antoinette Raaz Marco Gonzales
can Robert in the meeting now
very very good so Representative
Chasey will admit that and I
raise Marco Gonzales and down
Roper and again allow you to
contract continue to control
your presentation all right.
Into that rest.
Hello.
Good afternoon chair and
committee members my name is
after that right yes ma'am an
organizer speaking in support of
HB fifty one on behalf of the
New Mexico chapter of the Sierra
Club representing our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters of the state this
bill would say an interactive
database of state environmental
data and searchable map format
the publicly accessible database
will combine existing data from
seven environmental agencies the
database will be helpful in
aiding agencies to make better
wholistic decisions and will
help the public better
understand what's occurring in
their communities on state land
an example of data that would be
in the interactive database that
is of interest includes but is
not limited to public health
data and endangered species
status state parks active oil
and gas wells utility scale
solar and wind projects and
locations of impaired water I
urge you to vote yes on if the
one thank you for your time.
Thank you Marco Gonzales.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee I
apologize if my voice is muffled
a little bit I'm at a place
where we're gonna pass
Representative pattern energy
pattern is developing projects
going close to four thousand
megawatts we did transmission
project in New Mexico are these
project by pattern
representative about a seven
billion dollar investment in
wind and solar and we support
this bill and thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward the
responsible development of
renewable energy's critical to
our nation and the state's
future this means considering
the existing environment of a
proposed project from the outset
the environmental database
provides a valuable tool for
bringing the relevant data from
different state agencies
together to help inform
companies like ours and making
the use of this data in
informing renewable energy
development at the very early
stages with that Mr Chairman we
think of the sponsored madam
president for being four thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
Yeah we're also Mr chairman if I
could just say we did that the
bill at the request of pattern
energy that was one of the
amendments that we didn't.
Thank you chairman committee
members Dan Roper which had
unlimited here just to put in a
brief four to support for this
bill I have experience using to
existing tools both the game and
fish environmental review tool
that is common spoke of and also
a online mapping tool for water
quality with the environment
department and I can say that I
think it be really beneficial to
have you know both of the
information from both of those
tools along with all the
information it's just scattered
around state government all in
one place I think this is going
to be helpful for natural
resource professionals for folks
that work in city and local
planning and then also just
anyone that
needs good information and data
to aid in their local and
regional decision making and
planning
so yeah thanks for hearing my
comment.
Thank you that completes the
individuals who asked to speak
in advance somewhere recognized
In the believe that completes
the presentation for the
sponsors that right on chairman
changed.
That's correct the only one I
think that we were kind of
missing but we didn't have him
on the alert right now is the
gentleman from the State Land
Office so that's very good there
were no registered opponents
here legislation will therefore
go to members of the committee
we have first Senator Moores.
Sir Moores your muted Sir.
Thank you Mr we are doesn't work
we're calmer week broadcaster we
up and running.
We are broadcasting up and
running in.
We have a quorum.
We've got a quorum.
You.
Representative searched the
storage center Ivey Soto
etcetera do it our grads syrupy
soda this **** is beautiful
picture was on site and see
quick question is really cool I
get what you're doing here why
is it a quarter million dollars
a year seems like it should be
fairly simple out of the box.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
I'm gonna let this Madam answer
that because that's not actually
where we think we are
financially.
I'm Mr chair and senator Morris
I don't know if you're looking
at the updated FIR not the one
that I saw the fire that's
online medical.
This last updated of February
eleventh this one online website
school up February eleventh.
After your amendments to
associate so two hundred thirty
five thousand dollars a year
recurring cost.
I'm my understanding Mr chair
and senator Morris so UNM's
estimate was that it would cost
approximately a hundred thousand
dollars to set up the initial
database that's because they
have to compile the data from
all the other agencies and put
it in the same format so that
it's searchable on the map so
that's where their initial set
up cost is and then they have a
little bit of recurring cost to
maintain the database update the
data and that the system that
they use actually allows
creation of a report if you use
the database at school that the
existing game efficient firemen
are beautiful lets you do this
to where if you're a registered
user you can actually draw shape
on the map and the database will
step back out a report to you
listing the species data inside
that line so this database we
have something similar so they
have to set up that reporting
structure so that's where you
and Ms cost is I know that in
the initial of fire and the
reason I was asking about which
FIR was is because in the
initial estimate I know the
EMNRD had said that they needed
to have to use and that was
initially because they were they
were misunderstanding something
about the rare plant requirement
and they they told us that they
amended that FY are down to one
F. T. E. so I'm hoping that
that's what sense in that FIR
that you're looking at the
reason that they still needed
one FTE was because and they
told us that a lot of their oil
and gas location data for older
wells is still actually on paper
so they have digitizing that
they need to do anyway to get
that up to speed but that was
what their initial one time
costs would be it is because
they have to digitize some
location data that so on paper
and not on computers yet.
Yes Mr chairman of the chairs to
sit chair right now.
Yes are you there right I don't
see you there
Mr chair of Judy are Sir Senator
need to represent my policies
Judy yeah those states two
hundred thirty five thousand
dollars recurring costs and stop
by our
going out so yeah I don't get
that our server why Bourbon
would need and FY are the stuff
is pretty standard students
pretty cool website we all use
the stop you know you go realtor
dot com Google earth I don't see
why we need to recreate the
wheel on this
and do this so I guess my
question why do we need to
staffs you cost we're just going
to take something off the shelf
this isn't.
Well but it's not rocket science
or I guess it is technically
rocket science but it's not new
it's pretty cool technology
let's start we see all our.
Why why do we just give this
information to Google earth and
they can put it in.
I'm sorry I missed your or your
your tier office director.
Mr chair and senator Morris it
is all data that's currently up
and available it's not data
that's currently accessible and
so the land office is really
good about talking about this
and so I wish that they had been
here but they were really great
when they testified in previous
committees at noting the
difference between available and
accessible and the way the data
is now it's sort of buried in
these hard to use ways in
different agency websites and
we're talking about putting it
all on a map where you can just
turn the years on and off really
easily and also get these
reports back and so it's a way
to make it interactive and user
friendly in a way that just
isn't happening right now.
I get that I understand where
you're looking at it just seems
like would be easier and I just
we've been frustration Mr chair
this is another agency says they
want a piece of legislation D.
O. H..
I'm not the O. H. and M. DA
Russell St Roch your.
When they say they want to pass
legislation ask questions that
we need to answer also a little
concerned about that because I'm
not you know if this court if it
truly is a quarter million
dollars Courtney FY are is
something that should be taking
a look at I was going to see
it's not going to finance so
what's the answer for the floor
why this is going to finance it
it's true that this part has
been updated you for hiring new
staff.
I think this needs to be put
into our finances for the this
is easy to use it so that's off
the shelf right now so our our
sure.
If you get Representative share
get
Chairman Representative Chasey
or need more so are.
Mr chairman and and Senator
course.
Where the bill's going to Senate
side is really not my eight.
I.
Normal service reps what.
Well this building go to
Judiciary on house side but Mr
chairman and senator Morris I
think that what I heard miss
Coleman saying is that it
sounded like energy minerals and
natural resources needed to
digitize the data whether or not
this bill is passed.
They put that cost.
Estimate is is what I'm.
Kind of gathering but we we just
sent this Madam said we have
been in touch with all of the
agencies particularly really she
has and I think one of the.
Responses she got was well it
probably would take a full FTE
but they frown on our putting
half time.
Pardon me.
Into our fiscal analyses I I.
It's clear Mr buying may I just
look at the updated FIR myself
and and I you know I've had
other FY ours and I mention you
have to.
Senator on your rate per year
tells where you think that it's
a little bit excessive.
Mr chair to touring Casey we all
we've all had FY ours that we
asked them to screw in a light
ball balls in six to do what
staff person a quarter million
dollars like it is legal issues
forget for a minute if they
could get back with us on
appreciate Mr got a we are
running a bills so on we'll be
right back.
I understand my connections not
good so I'm gonna turn my video
off so that I can actually be
heard that's fine.
Thank you other members the
committee.
Seeing no hands pleasure the
committee for a motion Senator
Stewart the movie do past Mr
chairman.
What do passed on house bill
fifty one is amended second.
By Senator doing.
Is there any objection of those
present to the past motion on
Senate on house bill fifty one
excuse me.
Will you record all members of
the committee present supporting
a do pass you have a do pass
Representative Chasey on house
bill fifty one as amended.
Let our next to.
You're also shown on house bill
one eighty three Representative
Chasey will hear that one next
let me give everyone else a
moment to understand the order
will next here house bill one
eighty three on our agenda
followed by house bill sixty
eight.
This is a.
not on the agenda but the
equivalent Senate bill two fifty
two is in the Sanchez of tell me
that they want to hear the house
bill is one I think made the
greatest progress so I see
Representative day hoping here
on I think what I think is house
bill sixty eight will follow
that with.
Senator Padilla two fifty seven
follow that by Senate bill two
thirteen Senator Candelaria.
We'll proceed from there and to
get as much done as we can
thanks three hours so the next
item up with the house bill one
eighty three Mr Chairman
Representative Chasey Mr chair
we lost quorum and senator
Morris left.
We didn't do.
Representative Roger Montoya is
the primary sponsor.
House Bill one eighty three and
he's here and I'm going to just
back him up.
Hi very good.
We all understand if you're not
with us for the full hearing
Representative Chasey let me see
what I can do about finding our
members.
Thank you.
We have a quorum again.
Thank you.
Senator o'neill those are there
you are missing from a committee
here are you over in on another
committee right now yeah I'm in
Senate finance waiting to
present but I haven't got that
set.
I'm opportunities co chair but
yeah I'm here I'm here we're
gonna let me know all right
great the next bill up is house
bill one eighty three
Representative one thing
Representative Chasey.
Current.
No it
is did you who's presenting that
we're ready to go Representative
Montoya your in many Mike is
live and you have fifteen
minutes to twenty eight Sir Mr
chairman and members of this
committee thank you so much for
having me before we start if I
may I'd like to make sure that
my expert witnesses are brought
over that would be April land.
Allison pock.
And Justice irons.
Thank you so much so
In the context of this
incredible session I think you
for scheduling this bill.
My name is Roger Montoya I am a
proud Representative a disk of
district forty that includes
moda some media and.
Rio Arriba and Colfax counties.
This bill is titled.
H. B. one eighty three related
to children eliminating certain
fines and fees relating to
crimes committed by juveniles
before I started just briefly
want to share my connection to
this bill.
For the last thirty years most
of my adult life I've lived in
Rio Arriba county.
I've been a fierce advocate to
prevention programs for children
and youth I've done that work
through public education award
winning after care programs and
most recently standing up the
first ever shelter in Rio Arriba
history the Espanola pathways
shelter that focuses on the
homeless and those in recovery.
I used art as medicine to move
children from trauma to trust.
H. B. one eighty three.
Further affirms my commitment to
protecting young people.
Although New Mexico ranks at the
very bottom of most indicators
for childhood well being The New
Mexico children's code leads the
way in providing beautiful ways
to support New Mexico's
families.
This bill has been developed and
unanimously supported by the New
Mexico's sentencing commission.
And provides a clear pathway for
New Mexico let legislators and
lawmakers.
To eliminate destructive fees
and fines from the children's
code.
If I may I'd like to introduce.
April land first.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is April land
I've had the privilege of
serving as a professor at the
university of New Mexico closed
School of Law clinical law
programs for twenty three years
in the course of that I have had
the privilege of also
representing our children and
our delinquency system probably
hundreds of children disabled
children children living in
poverty children as young as
twelve and I'm grateful that
you're considering this bill
which is so important to the
children families that they not
suffer the additional act
economic burdens that are
imposed by fines and fees
I am also proud member of the
New Mexico's sentencing
commission which has we've all
from the very beginning in the
drafting of this bill and which
was able to this bill was able
to secure unanimous agreement
both at the juvenile
subcommittee level and the full
commission the full commission
including district attorneys the
attorney general's the victims
advocates the department of
corrections the office of the
courts.
As well as many other of
advocates and
and also the law office of the
public defender which quite
frankly is probably taking the
largest hit as a result of this
bill because children will no
longer have to pay for their
attorneys when they are being
prosecuted for just delinquent
acts
this is the there are long term
economic consequences of fines
and fees but in the project
issue of the University of New
Mexico clinical law programs
allow now yield the floor to my
clinical law student Justice
irons to speak specifically to
that thank you for your
consideration.
Good afternoon Mister chair my
name is just the science on the
third year law student at the
university New Mexico and I'm
currently in the clinical law
program.
Yes provide support of house
bill one eighty three because
you can also find that the
contrary to the well being of
children have long lasting
negative impacts on children and
their families in my role to
walk in and have been given the
opportunity to represent a child
in a delinquency matter and well
no it's printed on justice it
seems very clear that find that
these are not in the best
interest of children first of
all imposing fines on you aside
from being contracted the
purpose of the New Mexico
children's code has a disparate
impact on low income families
for this reason it can be argued
that find that these are useful
for promoting accountability
instead finding these
disproportionately harm certain
children solely because of the
family's economic status.
This issue is very important to
Mexico roughly one in four
children live in poverty and
Sally the statistic is only set
to worsen as fifty one percent
of households with children have
lost employment since March
twenty twenty on top of this
find the bees can have negative
long term consequences on
children and their families for
example provide these actually
been bound to increase
recidivism and expose families
to collection actions negative
credit scores license suspension
prevention of record selling and
criminal liability eliminating
fines and fees is a necessary
step to protect the future of
are you and that is why I urge
you to support house bill one
eighty three thank you so much
for letting me speak.
Thank you and my last expert
witness is Allison pock.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
pock and I'm an attorney at the
law offices of the public
defender for the past fourteen
years I've represented hundreds
of children in their cases in
children's court Albuquerque
today I'm addressing the process
and impacts of opposing public
defender fees in juvenile cases.
Under the children's code every
child must have an attorney so
public defender contract
attorneys automatically assign
then the parent or guardian of
the child must apply for a
public defender by paying a ten
dollar fee per case and provide
proof of income or support such
as Medicaid the vast majority of
these children qualify but the
application process is
burdensome and it's not just a
ten dollar fee some families
don't apply because a lack of
transportation others trouble
getting the required paperwork
and finally the for those who
are being raised by caregivers
like grandparents who don't have
access to legal documents to
apply when these families fail
to apply they are in turn mailed
notices and finally sent to
collections for a thousand
dollars per case.
Four seven hundred fifty per
probation violation.
These financial burdens
ultimately cause harm to the
state fragile children and
families we are supposed to be
protecting and helping thank
you.
Representative Montoya.
Mr chairman that concludes our
intro I so appreciate the
fifteen minutes you have given
us but we try to orchestrate
this so that we can use as
little of that time to move
through your broader agenda.
Really.
It I'm not sure if
Representative Montoya mentioned
about the the beast New Mexico's
sentencing commission
unanimously endorsed this piece
of legislation.
Thank you for the reminder
Representative Chasey and other
proponents are registered in
support of this include
Erica Sanchez NMCA and Bennett
were our with our with the New
Mexico public defender's office
and Rikki Lee Chavez Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association all of them watch
their support for this bill will
have no register opponents to
the bill and so will Mexico to
members of the committee.
And well I should say welcome to
our committee representative
want to thank you so much
appreciate it.
All right members the committee.
Also one of the three.
Questions.
I see none to be recognized.
etcetera Neil your hand is
raised yes it is.
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representatives for bringing
this forward
I'm just a it's really important
that people realize that the
sentencing commission doesn't
just endorse.
Bills right and left and maybe
this was a unanimous endorsement
and on that sentencing
commission report Justice Reform
committee it's all there's dust
is victims groups is all kinds
of folks so the fact that this
has the endorsement.
From that from the sentencing
commission and that important it
really gets my attention and I'm
supportive of it anyway so
anyway thank you.
Consider o'neill of members the
committee.
Sir more is that a hand up or is
that it was more of home Mr
chair covered my my screen you
know it's sort we're getting rid
of the fees or juveniles and
this is this is something
maybe a convert conversation but
before when I get the fees away
for all these.
Are we are and the answer is you
will is here from the courses
that they need these all these
organizations the species or cap
on the to the general fund so
we.
You know we have a ticket twenty
five dollar ticket for texting
and driving the churches are
under our so how are we
replacing this this this income.
for all these different feet are
funds that we were supposed to
be raising money for.
Senator quest I'm sorry to I'm
sorry Mr Representative box
for your one year experts might
be able to answer that sure.
Mr Mr chair and.
Senator the
The amount of of fees are
actually collected are so
minimal.
That it really wouldn't make
much of a difference and why
burden families who are already
just devastated through poverty
other means to please these
destructive funds and fees on
the families so.
I would like to defer to one of
my experts to further flesh out
but it's it's real common sense
Mr Chairman representative
Montoya is there anything in
here that says these bees are
only going to be way for
indigent offenders.
I'm gonna defer to April Lente
my experiments.
Of Mr chair US senator this this
bill does applies to all
children of for several reasons
one many children in New Mexico
are living in poverty two of the
amounts of fines and fees that
are actually collected at this
point are so minimal that it's
not you can see from fiscal
impact statement that we are not
putting that burden on any
particular agency and third what
has been found especially in the
area of children and families
and and to be clear this bill
only eliminates the fines and
fees for children within the
delinquencies system so there
still will be unfortunately some
some traffic fees and fines that
or not recovered by this bill
that will still continue to be
paid until we address that by
separate legislation so these
are strictly the bills with and
the delinquency code and what
has generally been found is that
it is more expensive to try to
collect the fees than than it is
basically we spend more money
trying to collect fees in this
form that we do and and fees
that we collect so I hope that
answers your question and if it
doesn't I'm happy to further
explore.
Well and I'm sorry your new we
have this debate over the years
Mr chair representative in our
you're new here but there's
there's nothing in this bill I
correct that says that
State senators along just as
usual and Jellico daughters
actually got in trouble which
they never did but if they had
their fees will be waived here
something in here it says is the
argument Mr chair representative
at this for poor kids that we're
we were saving poor families
from the burden of government
which I'm all for but there's
nothing in here that's actually
tied to encompass Mr chair.
Mr chair and senator that is
correct this law is straight
across the board so I think it's
it behooves us when we do these
kind of peace legislation or
using rhetoric processes help
for children yeah we're kicking
we're these poor little way Sir
our our our streets and we are
not be needs but we're also
accepting the wealthy children
to from this of the mutable
more.
Honest about how we're
presenting bills and quite
frankly I'm with you
Representative I think the
species or also debate we've
had.
On the traffic code for a long
long time what you explained
that this wasn't just the
traffic Cruces I think that's
something we need a state to do
the brain injury Trust Fund is
important for the state which I
believe it is we need to fund it
as opposed to turning a twenty
five dollar your and I don't
talk about this more just we're
taking a twenty five dollar
taxing driving future equipment
all under dollars each and then
trying to collect to see more
madam may work for the traffic
code also
so hope to work with you in the
future on that matter shows it's
disingenuous for us to do the
state
for a possible this would be a
partial I just turned it into a
revenue our collection so I'm
with you on the spirit that
still need to go a lot further
but just want to make sure we're
clear that this isn't just for
poor indigent populations for
everything else is a pop up
policy decision you may but we
are limited fees for the wealthy
also.
Thank you that is correct Mr Mr
chairman and.
Senator that is correct I as a
practitioner not a lawyer but
someone who interfaces with the
families most impacted families
of color from families of
poverty I think that's why it's
foremost in my heart because I
see that daily and I think that
you are actually correct that
this law is not prescriptive to
just those living in poverty but
it's mostly impacts on
disproportionally those
individuals in our state.
Hello but now we're sure
amendment Senator.
It was.
You're you're you're muted
center Ivey Soto.
Well I am sorry my amendments
for future bills today what it's
you are.
We have some we have some
doozies coming up don't kid
yourself all right thank you
again Representative Montoya
thank you good luck with the
rest of the afternoon welcome to
the legislature thank you your
next item is actually schedule
as Senate bill two fifty two but
we'll hear house bill sixty
eight which I understand as a
duplicate of the same the title
spaceflight informed consent we
have Representative Hochman
Vigil and Senator Diamond
so thank you both so I
understand you will carry the
same bill and because House Bill
Sixtyeight is over here already
will we'll advance house bill
sixty eight but the with both of
you carrying the bill we'll hear
from both of you you are you
will understand I trust the way
we're running things in the
Senate Judiciary still have
fifteen minutes it's now two
forty six and I'll leave it to
the to really decide who of who
speaks and what topics thank
you.
Thank you very much chairs about
this and members of the
committee the state Hochman
Vigil I think my cameras on but
I'm not sure Syntel still sixty
eight was mentioned first and
since you're correct our church
run case that that they are.
Duplicate bills I'll just go
ahead and present it for your
committee it's pretty simple
short sweet to the point I if we
could also bring over our
experts the Risha band Law she's
waiting and also secretary of
economic development appreciate
keys.
And while that's happening Mr
chair I'll just go ahead and
give the introduction so house
bill sixty eight and Senate bill
two fifty to amend the
spaceflight informed consent act
to revise the definition of
launch vehicle in section two of
the act and it also eliminates a
sunset provision locate located
in section four with that Mr
chair I'm gonna introduce I
don't want to my experts
depending at which one is on
sorry sorry there.
Yes I'm here can you hear me.
I can hear you yes if you want
to give a brief statement of
please feel free to do so.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair at center line
ending the members for your
attention on this topic I just
had some brief comments I just
wanted to have just I say that
you know this bill is very
important to spaceflight
companies currently doing
business in New Mexico by
providing these businesses
certainty and transparency with
regards to spaceflight
participant liability I also
wanted to underscore how
important it is that it also
supports and encourages growth
of this exciting and promising
industry in New Mexico as well
the bill keeps the state
competitive with others that
house a similar language in law
and seven other states that have
that kind of language and I will
continue to keep the state and
attractive option for high tech
and next Gen transportation
businesses so I'm happy to
support any discussion moving
forward thank you.
Thank you and I have Mister
chair pretty good relations
secretary keys issues on
now that the great.
I
think you are Mr chair.
Next.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of this
legislation is about protecting
our investment in a growing
space industry and bringing more
of these jobs to New Mexico
hi there is an aerospace
ecosystem in New Mexico a space
Valley corridor of related
businesses stretching from Los
Alamos to Albuquerque to truth
or consequences New Los crucis
the governor has targeted the
secretary for growth to
diversify the economy and bring
higher paying jobs to the state
the global aerospace economy
exceeds three hundred and fifty
billion dollars and New Mexico
has over sixty companies working
in the space industry we have
students at New Mexico tech in
NMAA you who want to work in
aerospace and stay in New Mexico
as the sponsor mentioned this
bill extends liability
protections now in place for
informed consent the seven other
states where there are lots
activities have similar similar
legislation without a sunset the
amount of worldwide attention
New Mexico has received from
being home to companies like
virgin galactic has been
launched and have CV is enormous
and this bill will ensure that
New Mexico can continue to
compete for these companies and
the jobs that come with them
thank you.
Thank you very much Secretary
secretary keys and at this point
Mr chair I'd like to handed over
to my co sponsor senator Dino.
additional remarks.
Thank you
Mr chairman of percent with this
bill as this is just a
straightforward that's a
ridiculous continue to keep her
in her tennis there's two
separate mereka in addition
attract others to this is
essential for economic
development in Sierra County
Anna County we appreciate your
time and your time now so we
have time for questions from the
members thank you.
You're much Senator the.
Proponents of the bill who
register in advance include also
Ashley Wagner with the New
Mexico chamber of commerce and
Watkins and Jill Myers so we
want to recognize their support
for the bill we had no one
register in opposition to the
bill members of the committee
for discussion or comments Mr
chair but if I may I really
quickly we also have I believe
Mike Doyle The New Mexico
Childers Association I think
he's in the audience and he
might be available to make a
statement or to give some
comments as well.
Yes you're still within your
time Representative.
I'm sorry to interrupt Mr
Chairman hi Michael Doyle I'm a
member New Mexico trial lawyers
we we've had our eyes on the
schools and we built and we work
with the sponsor before the bill
was introduced and she is
incorporated language that we
request thank you that's all I
have is.
Thank you.
Thank you for your presentation
Representative Senator.
Yes thank you very much Mr chair
yes Representative questions
regard members the committee.
Questions.
Senator Ivey Soto and then I see
Senator and I see Center o'neill
also Ivey Soto Stuart o'neill.
Thank you Mr Chairman just a
quick question how has the
So if we did this with but a
delayed effective date I would
delayed repeal date assuming we
did a kind of as a problem run
to see how well it would work
how well it's been working.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Ivey Soto well we we
haven't gotten to a point where
rate passengers have gone up
let's say with virgin galactic
however we have continued to
advance aerospace development
throughout the southern part of
New Mexico and the rest of the
state and this bill will benefit
not just virgin but any other
tenant are can keep potential
tenant at the spaceport and we
also continue to have the no
greater technologies to be
developed in New Mexico that are
no longer in an initial stage of
development so we feel now that
are the time now is right to
repeal a sunset clause in this
law because the technology is
there and we we expect aerospace
development to continue on in
New Mexico as is which is very
strong.
I'm and also just real quick
could you walk me through the
the the practicalities of the
change in definition on page two
lines eleven through thirteen.
Sure so we're just changing the
definition of launch vehicle and
section two Mister chairman
Senator the reason for the
changes to broaden it so as to
encompass different types of
what your goals are potential
tenants that could be at
spaceport or otherwise
throughout the state we don't
want to just keep that
definition to let's say the
spaceship that virgin galactic
is going to be utilizing
sometime in the near future so
that was the reason for that
change and then the only other
changes the elimination of the
sunset and section four.
Okay thanks very much.
Right next to Senator Stewart
then Senator o'neill.
I move to pass Mr chairman.
Motion is to pass Senator Neil
the second that motion.
The other discussion or comment
by members the committee.
Seeing Emily would you call role
in the past motion please.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator.
Yes.
The Representative Hochman Vigil
you have a do pass on house bill
sixty eight.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee sure
appreciate it thank you Mr
chairman Senator.
Mr Chairman gentleman I'm not
sure family heard about Pearl
that say yes.
Thank you all right
will next year in the following
order so folks can be
anticipating on deck we'll hear
of Senate bill two fifty seven.
Which is Senator Padilla
followed by Senate bill two
thirteen senators Candelaria and
how to meal and that'll be
followed by.
Senator o'neill on Senate to
seventy nine osteopathic
medicine.
So Senator Padilla on two fifty
seven you you know the drill
you've been in our committee
many times many many times the
session it's not to fifty six
and you have fifteen minutes
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and if we can allow
CYFD cabinet secretary Brian
Blaylock and senior justice
Barbara B. hill and that CYFD
council Madeline
When I into into the meeting I
would appreciate that Mr
chairman I just want to thank
you personally and and then your
committee for allowing this bill
to be heard the such important I
think they're coming in now so I
would start I know that we have
a limited amount of time we took
some very good feedback to
ensure committee analysis
provided on the original bill on
Senate bill two fifty seven we
did right develop a substitute
which you have before you today
and we did a lot of work to to
the substitute to make sure that
we were in very good shape we
did have sort of a a pregame
appreciate session with your
staff to go over the substitute
and we also did find something
pretty good analysis
which is very detailed on the
feedback that we were given up
to that point so essentially
what Senate bill two two seven
does is provide supports for out
of home placements for foster
children are or should children
it would be winding up in the
foster system it expands the
range of appropriate and
supported placements for
children alleged to be or
judicata delinquent to include
the homes of relatives are
effective can it requires that
an Indian child's cultural and
treatment needs to be considered
in any placement decision that
any out of home placement comply
with the federal Indian child
welfare act of nineteen seventy
eight it allows the court at any
time during the period.
How this on probation and upon a
petition to the child the child
attorney for the department to
place the child in the
departments are care for the
purpose of in out of home
placement it requires that
within ten days from the date a
petition is filed to to move a
child that the court shall
conduct a hearing to determine
if the child should be placed in
the departments care for the
purpose of an out of home
placement
it requires that when a child is
living in a home without a
parental support that the court
certifies that they are in and
out of home placement opening up
additional supports federal in
nature and requiring CYFD to
provide reunification permanency
and other support services to
the family and medical personnel
while CYFD to pull down federal
funds and it's just a few
moments ago for increased
supports and supervision of the
children who are at the
recurrent risks were in and out
of home placement
the impact of the bill is pretty
significant I think it's a very
positive as well it provides a
families in homes without parent
critical support will receive a
monthly stipend of six hundred
dollars with many youth
receiving more in specialized
increments when they have
specialty needs or what have you
whereas before there were that
funding was not there making it
very difficult for these out of
home placements to be able to
provide housing food clothing
you name it makes this eligible
for guaranteed housing until
twenty one as a legal
entitlement under UFC and you
might recall that in two
thousand nineteen we did have
significant sweeping legislation
good helped the children that
were aging out of foster care at
the age of eighteen and provide
those supports to those families
I'm sorry to those are young
adults
to the age of twenty one it was
a huge move forward for the
state of New Mexico we joined
about seventeen or eighteen
states at that point to to
really help these kids about
three hundred and fifty of sorry
excuse me young adults three
hundred fifty of them that that
now have the supports of the so
badly need makes them eligible
for extended then.
Kate regardless of income or
assets until the age of twenty
six and then we do know that you
know typical insurance for for
my children as an example that
they're going to turn twenty six
this year we're trying to figure
out exactly how we're gonna make
sure that they have a health
care that they need but this
would provide that support all
the way to the age of twenty six
mandates identity theft checks
and consumer law systems if it's
needed to mandate screening for
disability related benefits and
assistance with obtaining
For for if it's appropriate it
maintains traditional
transitional independent living
place of planning with a focus
on supports for education
employment behavioral health and
other needs we just talked about
it mandates reunification
services and permanency planning
also makes them eligible for
subsidized government seed
currency including guardianship
and eligibility for Chasey
programs which was a big debate
our topic of debate two thousand
nineteen we passed the original
bills including the housing that
I spoke of it makes them
eligible for ETV training
vouchers on additional funding
for college which legislature's
also done tremendous work in
this area and more core court
oversight including required
notice to the court when the
youth is moved to a more
restrictive placement and that
full I. C. W. A. R. protections
so that's essentially the impact
of the bill and I hope that my
experts were able to come into
the room I know we have a
limited amount of time based on
this it is very you know well
run committees structure I would
like to introduce secretary
Brian Blaylock and senior
justice for review hello we have
Rebecca look excuse me that is
with us to ensure if you have
any questions for that area so
madam senior justice if you
might say a few words on the
work that we've done up to this
point.
Thank you Senator Padilla
chairman said on to is and
members of the committee good
afternoon my name is Barbara the
hello I am the senior justice on
the New Mexico Supreme Court I
stand in favor of Senate bill
two fifty seven for the reasons
stated by Senator Padilla this
particular bill allows for
a juveniles or placed on formal
probation who are under the
jurisdiction of the court for a
period of time due to having
committed of the delinquent Act
to essentially be allowed to be
to live outside of the home and
receive of federal resources if
that placement is indeed
appropriate for them and it
allows that the courts would
oversee this their parents would
receive notice of the
department's desire to allow the
child to live outside of their
legal home and and and live with
the a relative or other
appropriate placement and then
to receive federal funds
there were some concerns about
the due process that's that
would might be at issue here and
let me just say that whenever a
child is placed on formal
probation the court retains
jurisdiction to ensure that the
child is able to succeed in that
probation period and this is
just one other opportunity or
resources that would be
available to such children in in
hopes that it would enable them
to succeed during their period
to appropriations so with that
Mr chair members of the
committee all stand for any
questions and also.
Secretary Blalock thank you very
much.
Thank you madam senior justice
and surgery but what you can
also add before we go to other
the next.
You're still muted Mr Secretary.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you Senator Padilla for bringing
this important legislation also
right now in New Mexico there
are a hundred and thirty five
years that are on formal
probation and they're living in
a place without their parents it
to appropriations facilitated
out of home placement that
includes a hundred and fifteen
you who are living with non
parent can most recently grandma
under current New Mexico law
those you don't receive the
important legal protection that
they need there's little to no
court oversight around change of
placement.
There's no legal requirement for
reunification Services there's
no legal requirement for
permanency options if that's
appropriate for those you if
those you their native American
youth are not protected by
included in the child welfare
act anyway and so this bill
would fix that local it would
increase the court oversight
over the issue and we truly hold
CYFD accountable I see that as
the case may be we would welcome
this oversight and increase the
count ability from the court of
for these here this bill also
allows the court to certified
youth on formal probation living
and also with no parent is in a
court ordered out of home
placement in that would trigger
a appropriate legal legal
entitlement and support and
protection that certification
and making you and their
caregivers eligible for host to
support and services which
you've already heard about that
increase include increased
financial support increase legal
entitlement three indication
family support services concern
about protections around
identity theft additional
housing resources and of course
the health insurance your gross
income or asset into twenty six
right now those a hundred and
thirty five use are not eligible
for any of those support or
protection also would make clear
that these user eligible for
full protection under the Indian
child welfare act would make
also would make allowed for
Martin to use federal funding
still comes with a built in
funding mechanism because do it
online what we're doing in New
Mexico with federal regulation
which would allow us to pull out
that dollars in order to fund it
this still follows the policy
recommendation guidance to the
state policy advocacy reform
center first focus the coalition
for juvenile justice and others
and leveraging important point
are you who are on formal
probation to eight years and
work in the district two years
with a wide group of
stakeholders and experts
including national expert of
public sectors expert and other
state judges attorneys and you
and also we are a decrease.
Nation of for the judges in New
Mexico and senior justice Neil
who helped us with the committee
substitute to address what we
think addresses concerns any
concerns around the process so
that we feel comfortable moving
forward with this bill thank you
committee thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr secretary thank you
Mr chairman that's our opening
statement and we're ready to go
with where we like going to
thank you Sir Padilla register
proponents in support of your
bill include the following Rikki
Lee Chavez New Mexico criminal
defense lawyers association
about about our New Mexico law
offices the public defender I'm
Barron Jones ACLU current with
lock national association of
social workers and Bettina
slate.
we now have a to up to ten
minutes for opposition and we
have four for individuals who
have registered in opposition
these include Erica Sanchez
April lands Barron Jones amorous
of the hill that we can have
those individuals admitted into
the committee and let me first
ask just because of the order in
which are listed with my report
if any of those individuals have
a spokesperson for an organized
opposition if not then I'll
admit each one of you into the
committee for that opposition so
is is anyone who I just
identified a spokesperson or
wish to.
Direct me on your opposition to
the bill.
Yes Mr chair this is Erica
Sanchez
I will I will the initial
speaker and then directed to
to us to to all right miss
Sanchez there will be a total of
ten minutes a lot for the
opposition so do I understand
you will control the time of the
other opponents.
Yes.
Very good it's three oh seven
you have ten minutes.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Erica Sanchez I am the
director of policy and advocacy
at New Mexico can we partner
with young people impacted by
foster care and juvenile justice
to support their transition to
adulthood.
And I'm can has a thirty year
history of working to improve
the experiences of children and
youth in foster care we
respectfully stand in opposition
to Senate bill two fifty seven
and a committee substitute well
we agree that young people on
probation living outside their
homes need resources we do not
think placing them in the
custody of the state in order to
access supports is sound public
policy.
The intention of this bill is to
allow the state to access
federal title for each funds
where the foster care funding
for user who are educated under
the delinquency Act in order to
receive these foster care funds
the state must take custody of
the child this bill brings youth
into foster care that bypasses
the abuse and neglect act which
provides for the removal Act and
placement of children and then
do and in doing so by passes the
processes of the foster care
system including the provision
of legal counsel for parents and
reunification supports as well
as the guaranteed efforts toward
permanency and a path out of
foster care for the year.
This is a back door foster care
the judicial processes under the
abuse and neglect actor not
unnecessary barriers for
families their due process
protections in addition this
bill contradicts the purpose of
the delinquency Act in all of
the work that's been done in the
state over the last decade to
avoid pulling use deeper into
systems the state has worked
hard to handle the majority of
juvenile justice referrals
through informal means such as
time waivers in consent decrees
rather than into education and
since the state will only
receive these federal funds for
youth who are educated this bill
creates an incentive for the
state to pursue a Judith Judy
cation for you whether it's to
access the funds for the state
or for the associated benefits
for the use in their family.
Also this bill isn't specific to
use who are currently under the
particular circumstances that
have been mentioned such as
those who live with family this
bill allows the department to
place youth who are educated not
just with their with their
relatives who by the way must
become licensed foster parents
in order to receive the funds
that they can be placed in other
licensed foster care settings
which include foster homes and
congregate care facilities.
The intention behind this bill
maybe for one person purpose we
have to look at what the bill
actually says and what it
doesn't if passed this statute
will outlast the current
department leadership the
current administration and all
of the intentions expressed
today what this bill says is
that the court can place you
through judicata in custody of
the department and foster care
without an abuse and neglect
case being filed without
requiring counsel for parents
who are having their children
removed without providing
reunification supports for those
parents to get their children
back without the department
having to work toward finding
permanency or a permanent
placement outside of foster care
for those years and without the
court ensuring the department is
working toward use permanency.
Also I I want to speak on some
of that potential budget that
were outlined for if this bill
passes and there were a number
listed like extended foster care
mandatory Medicaid to age twenty
six TV programs and you need the
funds but those benefits only
kick in if a use is in foster
care on their eighteenth
birthday and it's concerning of
the goal is to bring you into
foster care and keep them there
until they turn eighteen in
order to receive benefits I
think there are better ways
youth and families can get the
support and resources they need
that also aren't contrary to the
permanency goals and state and
federal law so increase you to
vote against this panel and I
appreciate you allowing me to
speak I'm next we will go to
April land and then more is to
be happy.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and professor
April Landis I introduce myself
earlier I recognize the
importance of what we're trying
to do here obviously resources
for our children in the state
are vital importance and I also
apologize that I have not really
been up to my elbows in this
bill or this process my concerns
are does arise as a practitioner
primarily in the delinquency
field that it does look like
we're moving some of what
usually takes place in the child
protective services process into
the delinquency aspect I know
that there's been ongoing work
around this but I think for the
reasons that this on China's
articulated before I just spoke
about incentivizing the
judgements against our children
are whether we have adequate
protections with in the
delinquencies system to protect
the rights of parents and
families I see the rights of
parents as really harmonious
with the rights of families
because the whole.
Wharton Senator a reasonable
efforts well I don't practice
and I defer to those who do in
that area certainly clearly
important I also just reviewing
the standard I know we have
taken the standard from the
federal title for easy standard
but I would hope to be part of a
working towards a a way in which
the children can get the
benefits of these but we do not
sacrifice the their with their
rights to be part of the family
of origin or at least have some
connection to that and also
potentially there are
opportunities to resolve their
delinquency manner without being
further burdened by the
delinquency system in order to
get these these funds not to
mention the availability of the
this opportunity for children
who have not yet entered into
the delinquencies system we
would not want to incentivize
the I look forward to working
with the the team to figure out
how these issues can be resolved
and I thank you for listening.
Thank you next can we go to
timorous of the hill and then
Barron Jones.
And Miss Vigil ms Jones
collectively you all have three
minutes remaining so please be
judicious your time.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Marissa the
hill and I'm a former foster
youth in today I'm opposing
Senate bill two fifty seven.
But I would like to state my
concern and why.
As introduced in as amended in
this incentivizes bringing young
people into the system this bill
does not state nor promotes
working towards permanency in
helping young people exit the
system the way this bill
currently read sounds like it's
an ascendant in incentive and
encouraging young people to go
down the path of aging at
eighteen.
So they can access the resources
for H. studies and as a former
foster youth yes these resources
are important but in most cases.
And as a form of Aussies these
resources are important to be.
Sorry.
This is our program but in some
cases negative aspects of foster
care outweigh the benefits of
those resources there has been
better ways to get resources for
young people and families thank
you for your time Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Mr Johnson
recognized for two minutes.
Mr chair Mr downs is not
present.
Very good.
Mr chair can eight can ages
mentioned then since there's
another minute left that there
were a couple of others who who
where
submitted requests to speak
today but it doesn't look like
they were left and including
Pegasus legal services for
children and some other family
advocates.
All
in all I can tell you is they're
not on the list that I have in
front of me for opponents all
but in any event that's why I
kind of encourage up opponents
to organize themselves that way
you'll know who to let in and if
you wish to let them in they
would have been allowed in
within that ten minutes of
opposition so hopefully that
explains the reason I'm
following the procedures that
I'm that I'm using in any event
that come with the time we will
offer the opposition Senator
Padilla you had not exhausted
your time.
You know I can recognize you for
two minutes for response if you
wish Sir yes thank you Mr
chairman and then ask the
secretary to respond to the some
of the feedback I I think at the
end of the day before he does
I'll be real quick you know the
scientists I invited multiple
times and she was very wonderful
about participating in the
discussions leading up to this
point we were on the absolute
same side of everything when we
first went through this process
two years ago to get this thing
you know what what you're New
Mexico the legislature adopted
in the governor signed it so I I
think her for her work and I
think that the those that spoke
out Secretary Blalock.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I can
just tell from the public
comment with a lot of education
to do and so and and we look
forward to working
collaboratively with those
individuals we spoke earlier a
lot of things that they were
asking for this bill dollars
providing reduplication
permanency for the children who
are currently living in a and
also without parent does a
hundred and thirty five children
who currently do not have those
legal protections in this bill
would offer those legal
protections for them and I look
forward to having you in that
dialogue also under testing you
justice has has worked on that
as well thank you thank you
Secretary of that exhaust the
fifteen minutes so we left for
advocacy I will now next go to
members of the committee all due
respect to the senior Chief
Justice but I'm match new maybe
questions directed to
members of the committee with
questions.
Anyone at all.
Senator Moores and then Senator
Lopez thank you thank you Mr on
over on on site the line today
but secretary day locked our
appreciate you finding Senator
corals beard our system has been
lost to the session so so you
found it but I seriously are you
a lot of the the comments and I
stretch the that many of the
people were point was professor
what were you professor of and
some of the things you talked
about with some of the aging out
and not encouraging placements
were very concerning to me Mr
secretary portal if you could
take the opportunity to educate
me because I'm very nervous
about this bill now.
I'm secretary.
Doctor bill thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr thing the committee
thanks Senator Moores
so I I believe if I understand
the objection correctly there is
a concern that once you get on
formal probation there will be
incentive for them to continue
on probation until the eighteen
so that they can access extended
services which would include
housing
in that extended health
insurance with they will be
eligible for their their at
eighteen because of the age of
our appropriations population
it's likely those you will be on
probation when they turn
eighteen and so the services
will be available to them but if
they are in terms of probation
are completed and finished they
wouldn't stay on probation
simply to access the services by
eighteen there other pathways
that we would use including of
articulation agreement including
transferring the case and asking
for the dependency court to take
a decade it that's what would be
appropriate and so we don't see
the we think that there are
sufficient safeguards in due
process protections and an
existing law that would prevent
those you I'm staying in care of
beyond the time when they would
be completed appropriations.
Mr chairman thank you secretary
of
professor was a bond.
Prince prince L. I. Andy Lind I
believe so it's thank you thank
are up to jul issue there.
Mr chair.
That was after April land a
motion to spelling.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator more the
concern I had was more that that
there are alternatives are
available to children who are
facing delinquency charges in
our delinquency court that don't
involve an actual education so I
and also I have to look at I I
respect deeply Secretary Blalock
he's looking at this from larger
numbers than what I'm looking at
every day down in children's
court we do have a lot of young
children who are placed on
probation but often younger
children will be diverted from
getting a judgment against them
or educational we call it under
the children's code by other net
other means such as a waiver of
time limits or a consent decree
and those my concern is not so
much with it I I am and share
the concern about children who
are older being reading and
staying longer on probation
purpose we in order to get the
benefit my concern is more my
experience has been that once
children or on probation
especially when they started the
young age they can end up being
on probation and then any
delinquent Act because of
probation violation and they can
get more sort of entangled in
the juvenile system in a way
that will can have long term
consequences for them and so
what I'm concerned about is that
if if being of the finding of it
being found a delinquent child
to be adjudicated delinquent
child is a necessary predicate
to the services it will then
incentivize the the the those
kinds of resolutions of juvenile
matter so I hope that makes it
clear and like I said as I said
I I was not involved in the day
to day at this and I'm happy to
be of service to by county.
Mr Chairman with your.
Permission I'd like I'd like to
have that the singer Justice
respond as well.
Thank you Mr chair and professor
land of for your for your
concerns I believe that the bill
has within the caught that
contours of the bill adequate
protections to avoid
incentivizing of children from
being carried on into the system
longer than they should be of
first of all the children as
from day one of being charged
with the delinquent Act have of
public defender to ensure that
their interests are protected
as well as the court of the
court will be reviewing these
cases and again this only kicks
in when a child is placed on
formal probation it does not
affect children who are placed
on a supervision by way of a
consent decree or a time waiver
so with respect to those
children it's a small population
and it's already those children
that are that are living outside
the home that that this bill
would essentially impact again
of the parents would be given
notice and if if they
participate in in the hearing
the judge would would hear their
views as well as abuse of the
child with the child's lawyer
present
that the parents may be given an
attorney as well so there's a
lot of
of layers of protection and
review for these cases it's not
as though CYFD is just deciding
this unilaterally but rather
that the courts will be very
much involved as well as a law
office of the public defender
thank you Mr chair Mr chair of
senator to justice that that
product you touched on it one of
the concerns I wrote down in my
notes was talking about rental
Council.
So can you since I'm not that
familiar with this process
communicate us on that but yes
for us to land.
Thanks to all on what so
transcriptomics through what
happens with the terror she said
that would get water but sit to
songs like they're kind of
walking into.
By group of lawyers on our
protective.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
feel on this committee to
justice.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator
Mr chair and senator Morris for
that question.
When a child is charged with the
delinquent Act the parents don't
get a lawyer only the child gets
a lawyer so throughout the
process of delinquency of the
prosecution's if you will of
parents are not given in lawyers
at all
this would enable the parent
after the trials placed on
probation to be entitled to a
lawyer if the court so considers
it important and I would
envision that it's those cases
where the parent objects where
the parent says you know I don't
feel comfortable with the the
petition or the motion that's
been filed I don't necessarily
agree in that case the court may
appoint them a lawyer but in
these cases lawyers aren't
entitled to excuse me parents
aren't entitled to lawyers on
the other side of these cases
which are abuse and neglect
cases look up parents are
entitled to counsel so this is
an opportunity to allow the
court to review whether CYFD has
identified appropriate placement
for the child that would enable
back care taker to receive
federal resources and the parent
may or may not receive council
but I would envision that the
the parent will receive notice
but if the parent objects to it
certainly at that point the
court may indeed appoint them a
lawyer I hope that clarifies
your questions.
It did Mr chair Senator our
chief justice to all to extend
also.
These aren't necessarily a and
get another look at the stocks
costs the issue this is about
the criminal process for the
trial that's why the parents
aren't four correct.
I thank you Mr chair and senator
Morris I think that's a fair
description of what the
intention of the bill is of the
parents are not entitled to a
lawyer throughout this process
any way and may be entitled to a
lawyer the court so deems it
appropriate particularly if the
parent objects to
the placement out of the home I
I think the court would
certainly consider the parents
use at that point Mr chair so
Senator just I really appreciate
that and I would just like to
get some clarification from
essential for us to land on that
issue where you're concerned
support that.
If Mr chair of whoever's
available are essential to us
where.
Mr Mr chair Senator more how
about if I try and then.
Way of services sure what are
you a professor of work work I
met professor of law at the
university of New Mexico School
of law this is one of the twenty
third year here where I'm proud
to Sir but mostly on the
delinquency side so what part of
what concerns me is about this
is that it does look like we're
taking some of the of the
processes that usually are done
and the protections that are
usually provided within the
child protective services and
making a placement opportunity
available with in the context of
a delinquency proceeding where
the parents don't have the right
to counsel and where the court
will make a finding as you can
see it on page three of the
lines for of the copy that I
have that at the hearing
pursuant to this section the
courts make written findings
that by a preponderance of the
evidence the continuation of the
home would be contrary to the
welfare of the child and that
reasonable efforts have been
made to prevent removal of the
child from the home what is
usually a finding based on my.
Albeit limited understanding
that usually happens within
child protective services where
where parents have lawyers
children have their lawyers that
are defending not just the right
to liberty which is our focus on
the delinquency side but are
they're they're they're right to
their family the right to to to
having reasonable efforts made
to keep their families together
or to have the determination
that is not in their best
interest and then hopefully if
we can work together how the
access to these kinds of
benefits that they so very much
need
I hope that that is correct and
clear.
I I really appreciate that
process and Chief Justice this
is actually incredibly
Interesting conversation the
apologize about speed but you
guys are honest or dishonest
fascinating issue and Senator
Padilla really appreciate the
support
thank you all to call you'll
for.
Yes madam chair Notre Mr chair
I'm here we have following use
are more as we have Senator
Lopez Senator Ivey Soto and
Senator Duhigg Senator Lopez
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Padilla
in our analysis that we have
received in the sense that
fiscal impact report on page
three there was a section of the
site the first second third
fourth paragraph down
yes right concerned I just
wanted to ask for clarification
so this is
page nine.
And this is in section two
paragraphs State
is proposing to add language
that allows CYFD.
You know through a GPO to remove
a child from their parents home
for up to seventy two hours.
I'm requiring a court
intervention.
And I'm just asking because I
think usually are our time frame
is within forty eight hours or
if I'm you know could there just
be some clarification as to what
this particular point that are
FIR is making.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez Secretary Blalock.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I I think that
probably just you just as the
hell we're back in late would be
a better place they both work
exhaustively on that committee
substitute in order to address
those concerns.
I apologize Mister chairman I'm
not looking at that the
substitute but it's I think it's
still the same language but your
thank you madam senior justice.
Thank you Mr chair ins and
Senator Lopez let me turn to
Rebecca lake it because I
believe that we worked on
ensuring that they was adequate
reviewed by the court of for any
of the placement long term
placement I'm trying to find a
particular section two paragraph
C. let me defer to to miss like
it please thank you Mr chair and
senator.
You.
Thank chair Senator Lopez and
members of the committee there
is no provision in the
substitute bill as far as in
regard to seventy two hours the
bill provides that the court
always has to have a hearing
prior to the placements and so
CYFD cannot remove a child prior
to prior to a hearing the only
provisions for our for a change
of placement when there's
exigent circumstances and.
The department has to
To notify the court no later
than forty eight after the
emergency and include a factual
basis for that emergency chains
and then a hearing will be held
no later than ten days after
that after receipt of the notice
if any of the parties the child
attorney or any other party of
Jack's.
Okay I'm I just wanted to make
sure Mr chairman of courses
we're going through you know the
different sections and such
making sure that this was
addressed is that would be a
concern of mine also thank you.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto
center to do it.
There is.
Right.
After graduating.
Echo.
But after thank you thank you
so.
It appears that when you
activate your microphone is
generating an echo for some
reason the echo goes away soon
as you mute your microphone so
we've isolated because.
You're you're moving your lips
but your microphone is needed.
Senator Ivey Soto.
So I go to Senator Duhigg and
then we'll come back to let you
read maybe the results that okay
Senator Ivey Soto we'll go to
Senator do it next summer to do
it.
Thank you Mr chair.
And.
Thank you Senator Padilla for
bringing this at I think this
question would be for
For justice Vigil I or perhaps
professor land or or both
On page two of the sub it says
that the rules of evidence would
not applaud for hearing for for
one the a hearing on on one of
these placements is that when
when there are hearings in the
the normal procedure when when
children are more their homes
and I apologize I'm not terribly
familiar.
Researchers are searching
It is that the case are are the
rules of evidence suspended for
those hearings as well.
I'm sorry.
Excuse me Mr Chairman said
Montez senator do Hey can you
repeat your question because I
was hearing the echo from from
someone and didn't get your
question please thank you.
Thank you Mr so Mister chair
justice in the sum of it says
that the rules of evidence don't
apply to hearings under this
bill
if this was for the hearings
that take place normally in a an
abuse or neglect situation do
the rules of evidence apply to
those hearings.
With respect to delinquency
hearings yes with recent so this
is a review hearing after the
child's been adjudicated so the
yes the rules of evidence would
not apply to this phase of the
delinquency proceeding.
Mr chair just as I.
And I let me see if I can ask my
question different way because I
guess my question is as opposed
to doing this in the delinquency
contacts if this was a hearing
that was happening and in the in
the abuse and neglect context.
That that that my understanding
is would otherwise be followed
to remove a child from their
home but for this bill
with the rules of evidence
supplied that.
With respect to the phase of the
delinquencies are or if if if
the child were to be removed
from home yes in the abuse and
neglect side yes.
Is that your question yes Mr
chair justice yes and and so I'm
I'm just wondering why and I
understand that maybe that that
this would be.
But let me make sure that's
correct with miss Leggett if she
can answer that question I don't
want to mislead the committee at
all and I think that's a very
good question thank you.
Mr chair Senator do a members of
the committee.
The there's more steps in the
abuse and neglect case so it
starts with a petition by the
way if the to
Two with allegations that the
parent has abuse or neglect of
the child the first these
findings of contrary to the
welfare of the child and that
the department made reasonable
efforts are made in the experts
because you order and the
problem and probable cause
standard applies to that ex
parte custody order and then at
the first hearing that happens
after the petition is filed
there's a custody hearing the
rules of evidence do not apply
at that hearing and again
there's a probable cause
standard in regards to.
In adjudication and then for the
actual Judy cation of abuse or
neglect the rules of evidence to
apply.
Thank you I appreciate that
explanation so Mister chair
I.
Justice are are are Mrs let's
look at.
Why.
What why shouldn't the rules of
evidence applied to one of these
hearings.
That we would have under the
spell.
So.
Well well primarily because it
would be in my view Mr chairman
and senator Duhigg it's a it's a
can to the initial removal of a
child under the abuse and
neglect.
Of proceedings in other words
this is kind of a blended.
preceding that would take place
in after Judy cation of that
should be the child being
adjudicated as having committed
a delinquent act
and it's dealing with of the
child on probation and at that
point because adjudication is
already been taken it's probably
not as critical if you will to
impose upon both the state and
the child to prove their case by
of all the rules of evidence in
the limitations of what can be
permit considered by the court
with respect to that placement
so it's after education it's
it's reviewing kind of the
status of the child how he or
she is doing after the child's
been adjudicated as having
committed the delinquent acting
so it's more of a can of a like
a review hearing placing the
rules of evidence on any
determination by the court at
that these is probably it is
probably something that may not
serve the process because
they're like I said there are
times as miss Leggett pointed
out where the rules of evidence
are relaxed because the court is
in need of information of from
those involved to see what is in
the best interest of the child
here what we need to do.
That's my assessment of why we
wouldn't require it at this
phase of the proceeding.
Okay I appreciate that
Senator Mr chair Senator Moores
was was asking about the.
The the parents being being four
and turned in and I understood
your initiatives that do we have
are there any other.
Process is currently in our law
where we're child can be removed
from their parents home and the
parent would not automatically
be anti entitled to an attorney.
Just as well Mr chair and
Senator Duhigg.
Let me defer to secretary
Blaylock certainly an exigent
circumstances children are
removed from home on the abuse
and neglect side prior to the
point in time where the parent
is receives an attorney
and certainly on the delinquency
side the parent is not entitled
to an attorney and often times
while those proceedings are
pending the court may require
the child to to live outside the
home
because of what's to taking
place in the home and the risk
to that child so I guess the
answer to my question is yes
there are occasions where a
child is removed from the home
and the parents do not receive
an attorney
before that decision is made
thank you Mr chairman and Mister
chairman Senator and senior just
I think in this is one hundred
and thirty five children that
were referenced I you Secretary
can tell us but I don't think
any of them had rental the
parents of representations for
secretary.
And and and thank you I mean you
before you answer because I
think my question was a little
more narrow it wasn't are there
any circumstances and I I
apologize that I probably didn't
didn't articulate it correctly
I.
It's not I'm I guess my question
isn't others any circumstances
where our child is as removed
and and the parent is again
turning my question is in our
lives there is there any point
where there is a determination
by the court
that a child is removed should
be removed from that parents
home when part as part of
participating in that
determination the parent does
not get an attorney.
Mr chair and Senator Duhigg I'll
defer to Mister place of
Secretary Blalock thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Duhigg
inconclusive helpful right now
that actually one of the
problems we're trying to solve
and I appreciate the narrow how
much how much you nearly to the
question which is right now do
court to make those findings
when the children are remote
right now we do it Senator
Padilla mentioned we have a
hundred and thirty five kids
right now as of this morning who
are living as part of their
terms of probation and home
outside of their parents all of
their their parents were not
afforded an attorney in that
process in order to make that
determination into one of the
things we're trying to fix what
this bill is giving more due
process protections and legal
protections for those children
should also say that of the
fourteen or so state that we
look at that provide these
children with additional legal
protections unification
permanent the additional support
on the juvenile justice side we
did not find the state that
those provide an attorney for
the parent in that juvenile
justice proceeding when the
court is making a high.
Thank you Mr that's all I have
for now.
The next time you Soto.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
without an echo.
Without a word that I've I've
job called into my phone so
we'll see how that works.
And and and activate that but I
appreciate the impact of the
bill I I this bill very
problematic right now and I
don't think it's ready to
proceed.
but but but but let's give it a
shot the the where we go on this
and and and a lot of pick up
where better do it left off.
Because because they have well
we've got a hundred I told right
now whether parents were not
afforded an attorney I don't see
how that.
I don't see how page two line
eighteen.
Thank you for that what it does
the council may be part because
that that doesn't that doesn't
there's a bit of the children
parents are going to get an
attorney act as up to half of it
impact report not providing the
turn it doesn't give any
standard.
For the court in determining
whether the but the the child's
parents would get an attorney to
give no guidance whatsoever in
terms of what the court would
consider as to whether or not
the parents will get an
attorney.
I would want to go back to the
the two examples of the centre
Justice again.
Interview them and the decade
those yep Emergency proceeding
we remove the of the the top of
the home that's what we need to
do and this and that the parents
are having to carry that point
but then that the parents are
afforded an attorney.
Prior to that case going to a
your.
White white and the link with
the case these are criminal
cases are pending.
But if sometime during that
during that process of the
criminal case that is pending
the child is placed somewhere
out because because of that that
because the the situation that
led to the delinquency or that
may be hi to the billing but the
are present in the hall.
And and and so that is not a A.
M. and I believe that the case
is supposed to be resolved at a
fairly expeditious matter be six
months or so this is very
different from this these
proceedings where this could be
here.
And so and the one factor doing
I think you are you are right on
point in terms of your
questions.
As to as to the fact that that
we don't have an equivalent
situation.
Where where the parent is not
supported an attorney.
In these in these
cases.
I don't so I'm I'm I'm a little
confused also bye bye bye bye
subsection D. affection one
anyway impact page two winds
fifteen through nineteen because
as I've read section thirty two
way yes to that twenty eight no
protection is required.
In order for the parents to be
part so I don't understand why
you're following a separate
petition along with the
petition.
In order to make the purported
you don't have to do that all
you got to do a big commotion or
maybe the parents as a party
that is actually what section
thirty two Y. despu S. twenty
eight find people.
And and and and subsection that.
And so and so and so that your
so that so we're creating a it
not only are we create more
cumbersome process but the
problem is that you're out of
sync with you out of sync with
the thank think when.
It seems to me because of
subsection.
So you have the the the without
the protection.
File in this new material here.
Subsection eight the partial
connectivity here and within ten
that.
Now that the court and they
about two weeks.
Prior to the hearing all parties
shall meet.
Well for the party.
What part at that point doesn't
include a pair.
Down below you have a petition
being filed you don't have the
parent being named the party you
have a petition being filed with
the court have to rule on as to
whether or not the parent is
going to become part of Medicaid
so that your subsection the
meeting
to see if I can be fatal
provided very placement
agreement actually that doesn't
include.
The way that the federal.
I don't understand how it is you
make a decision about a
voluntary placement without
having the past present.
Really problematic for me.
President
what was that we would just
wanted to sponsor but there's no
need to go to a hearing let's
get the voluntarily hello wait
is the parent represented by
counsel not all they're not
represented by counsel.
So you got Harron.
Individuation whether child is
gonna be removed from their home
without council.
Either not part of this informal
setting or invited into the
formal setting.
Without representation.
Being encouraged to go for a
quotable voluntary placement.
With respect that's not but
there.
That's not voluntary.
When you have a child period or
or or or guardians of the given
reasonable notice of the time
and date.
I'm not sure what we will
notice.
If that if that is what part did
you call about twenty minutes
before the hearing.
I don't know what we will notice
that I don't know and certainly
we're not require actual notice
of the year.
There is no requirement of
back in the
actually know that the hearing
is taking place.
They're not Representative.
They're not a party at the point
because you have a separate
petition and
And a mailing not get loaded now
that's just going to page two of
this bill I am prepared to
continue through the rest of the
I will just tell you I
appreciate very much where the
apartment is coming from in
terms of what want to do I don't
see the bill as being ready yet
I don't see this bill as
providing actual due process
that.
Or families.
What I do to the bill doing is
strengthening the hand of the
department.
When I want to make a change.
But what if you are doing.
It allowing the parents and
equal footing in this process so
one of the one of the school
rules.
That is certainly one of the
fundamental rules of mediation
if you cannot go to mediation
when there's a power
differential between the part.
Rep power differential obviate
the goal the mediation to the
extent that subsection B.
and section one is subjecting a
mediated response.
With an outcome of a voluntary
placement.
A parent who then went out about
noted is not yet a party does
not have an attorney is not
guaranteed Attorney that the
power differential when you're
going up against the YFC.
but if the president and then
I'll probably have to go on and
then the next part of the.
Right I just want to let you
know that.
Well I appreciate you going in
detail through page two Senator
Ivey Soto thank you we did have
a PreSession on this number of
your comp very little of your
committee came up in the
analysis or came up in the
meeting yesterday I just wanna
let you know that it would have
been you know probably a little
more you know prepared with you
you had to say that let's go
through every single page today
and that we we have your
feedback because I've been
baking for this feedback for
weeks now this bill's been in
your committee since February
ninth the substitutes within
your committee since February
twenty fourth and I'd love to
hear it also you know let's to
go.
Well but
Mr Chairman Padilla to very
quickly without my doctor.
Bill I'm not a bunch of this
bill I understand that okay.
And I've been a little bit of
the working mothers bills and
doing other committee work sure
to be affecting the L..
To be fixing this bill for what
I am not reporter with respect
I'm sorry.
You know but I don't do the
bills being ready right now
because this bill at this point.
Is frankly it isn't right for
families being rolled over by
CYFD with no protection
whatsoever.
You know and so and then and
then and then we go on with the
issue of the fact that the rules
of evidence don't apply.
In this proceeding I I and I
understand that well what this
is about the the post
adjudication well it's both the
detention as to the the link
with the.
Yes.
In the interview the network
again what the beautification of
education of to use them all.
That individual executive.
Here we have whether not to get
the the home at ancillary to the
education.
What with the employer to the
dedication for all well you know
we don't need to have the rules
governing the black in the
public market the evidence will
show up like of that unification
what you're doing here is that
your by tapping that education
one of the rules of evidence
would apply.
And all of that.
Not only were not a party.
Not only are you not going to
concern me not only do not
necessarily get noted.
When we get
don't apply.
I'm sorry I don't think I don't
think that attorney to figure
these things out.
Thank you very much for that you
Mr chairman I appreciate that
this is the center of you sort
those bills that's why when
asked a senior justice on our
Supreme Court in a cabinet
secretary who is an attorney to
help us with this matter and I
appreciate that let's just keep
going if you're willing let's
keep going.
Or the street don't.
This this is a you know you've
got a situation that I don't the
other with the chair said in the
by the way.
If you're not so that one can
take the child.
Out of the home.
All the staff I understand this
correctly your job out of the
home but you're not terminating
parental relationship.
The hope you've got your letter
the personal relationship.
And then and then
let me see where the you are
there are costs.
Being that again against the
parent.
Is that correct in the bill.
Chairman representative.
Madam a senior justice.
I don't regard to prevent abuse
your doctor so I'm asking you
the question now.
Senators senators let's so
trying to make sure we go over
the chair Mr Chairman now it
better but the there are no
costs the project that's right.
Mr Chairman.
I understood that in the in this
bill what we had.
What that what that cost would
be at that based upon the job
for drugs.
Mr chairman when I with the
senior justice you recruit let
me know that they can absorb
those costs.
So you know it is a.
It
the end of the get out.
Okay that that you know having
regulates the fact that we move
on to page four.
There you have the accident
circumstances.
Okay the placement rate that
part but you notify the court
I'm not or not I get that the
purpose of what responsibility.
Right.
But when you have that the.
No hearing of ever held what the
court unless.
Hello the the the the our.
That.
Under that we have an affection
and.
If the child is removed from the
home.
And if somebody doesn't know
that they're supposed to object.
There's no hearing ever held for
the trial being removed from the
whole.
It's simply a notification.
How do you look at job in the
home and you never ever hear.
Mr Chairman there's it's
required that the hearing take
place within ten days.
Actually what we read that
section and together the
department that that that that
the state and needed change of
placement the department shall
notify the court no later than
forty eight hours after the
Marci change in placement with
the factual basis for the judge
placement.
Yes the court yeah the court job
attorney or any other party
we're not sure yet of the parent
RT objective are the place but.
A hearing shall be payable no
later than that date somebody
object I hearings this goggle
that need it nobody object there
is no hearing.
Mr chair why would somebody
object why would you have to
call that out this is a child
that we're talking about here
why why wouldn't.
What they've gentle lady they
don't have a lawyer maybe they
don't your chairman well when
they were permitting them to
have a lawyer Mr chairman that's
one of the few years Ivey Soto
and Senator Padilla I've asked
you to go through the chair not
because I need to have you call
out the chair but very frankly
because you're talking over each
other and this is becoming a bit
of an argument so let's try and
keep it a little bit more
differential one other if you
have a question or comment
please address it Senator
Padilla please wait until you're
asked to call for a question
Senator Ivy Soto the like what
is let's have some given take
place thank you very much
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman better but
the.
If you if it is believed that
that someone would always
object.
Then I do look at what the
governments are.
Believe Mr chairman of a third
party at that someone would
always object why do you require
somebody to object to get a
hearing Mr chairman better.
Have an answer for you on that
one but they would object who
wouldn't object Mr chair what
you object Mr Chairman better
but the I the.
I think very well this is why
there's a problem with this bill
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla four
year for years we have been we
have been putting.
Crying in the box and bank well
no judges ever got a that some
of our that we've been doing of
the state well court that
program but but there's no
accountability on it and and I'm
not sure but yes why wouldn't of
any object.
They may not have an attorney
because it's only a may that
they could get in the truck.
Mr chairman there's direction to
the court on when they would
authorize an attorney a public
attorney the public defender for
the.
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla
leave quite a debate where
there's direction to the court
what is the standard for the
court for to find an attorney
for the back where that is the
Mr Chairman I'm asking you
justice to derby she referred to
that just a few moments ago Mr
chairman.
Madam senior justice would you
would you respond to that with
you did a little while ago.
Well I appreciate Mr chair and
Senator Ivy Soto I appreciate
your
Your diligence with respect to
this particular bill and why
you're troubled by it and
because I think that this is the
first time that we are seeking
to do a blended system blended
system from the abuse and
neglect system to the
delinquency system and bringing
some of the
Decisions and processes that are
in the abuse and neglect system
over to the delinquency system.
And yet we're we don't have
those things in the abuse and
neglect system in in this.
In this placement decisions so I
can see your concern Senator and
saying well where is this and
where is that and why not
because we're used to the
dependency system where the
parents have.
An entire list of protections
and so forth and so on in in
your in your concern is well
taken
so let me just start with that
this is new this is new
legislation this brings the two
systems together to enable kids
who are on probation to be able
to access and resources in your
correct we don't want to run
amok.
And we don't want provisions in
this bill to be viewed as an
opportunity for CYFD to go out
and what kids out of the home
and place them out of the home
without due process so let me
make that clear nobody's asking
for that year and I appreciate
your diligence I appreciate you
looking at the bill very very
carefully to ensure because we
don't know who the judges will
be we don't know who will be
overseeing CYFD operations and
we need to be diligent as you
are in making sure that the law
protects everyone involved let
me just if I may I know I'm not
answering your direct question
but let me just mention when you
mentioned about the mediation
and the notice to the parents
those two sections can be
written reverse order where the
parent
shall the parent shall be given
reasonable notice and then you
could have the mediation after
that I think the way it's read
B. C. could become B. and B.
could become see on page two
section eight and maybe that
would help
A clarified that the parent
shall receive notice in these
cases period
And then after that before the
hearing the parents would meet
and so forth now with respect to
whether the parents get an
attorney you are correct there
is no requirement that the
parents receive an attorney and
that would be a determination
made by the court what are the
standards the standards are the
same standards that judges
consider every day and that is
is this in the best interest of
the child to be placed outside
the home and does the parent
object then yes I would I would
expect that will judges across
the state are called upon to
make these decisions all the
time would say I want this
parent to have an attorney but
it's not spelled out in the in
the in the statute you are
correct about that the criteria
for when a parent is entitled to
it and the bill be amended sure
to provide some of those checks
and balances but I know I've
gone too long Mr chairman and
senator Ivey Soto I appreciate
your going through this because
we do not intend course this
bill intended to go out and
remove kids from homes without
the due process protections that
not only they're entitled to but
parents are as well thank you
Sir I have nothing further on in
response.
Service center your muted sorry
so you.
You still have the floor
etcetera etcetera Ivey Soto your
cell unit.
Thank you very much madam chair
justice.
Senator
Mr Chairman better but the of
this is exactly my point that's
not spelled out it's not in the
bill the standard is not there.
It will be applied
inconsistently at this point.
The protection in this blend
that process the protections
don't exist.
And the one that process the
standard as well lack.
This blonde that process.
The rules have been changed.
Therefore brought the second
education in the context of
delinquency.
That would be very different.
But being brought of the second
education in the context of
delinquency.
It's being brought as an
ancillary proceeding.
Post post delinquencies.
And that's where the problems
lie in this bill Mr Chairman
Senator Padilla I I I support
the efforts that are being made
here.
But but but as they as they as
they first will run at it
Mister chairman Senator Padilla.
I think that the the second run.
I'm just I just I.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto you know on the the peace
on you know the may may appoint
an attorney for the family I
mean this isn't going to be.
By the time this this proceeding
occurs and I'm not being
attorney but something tells me
this is not going to be a brand
new thing to the courts for this
particular child there's going
to be multiple things that have
happened along the way to get to
that point when that judge would
would would look at everything
going on with this trial to
determine whether the current
would need attorney or not it's
Representative them because
maybe they haven't been engaged
in the child's what's happened
to them along the way I I don't
know each case is different but
I'm assuming they're going to
look at all that when they make
that determination so it's not
just I trust those judges to
make that decision we elect them
we put them in those positions
and and we I'm sure they're
supposed to look at everything
when they make a decision
whether someone should have an
attorney or not.
And and Mister chairman Senator
Padilla.
I trust the judges to I also
know that rules at the end of
the day.
We don't need rules to protect
the powerful we need rules to
protect those without power I
agree.
And and that's not provided for
here okay.
Thank you very much I do
appreciate the effort that you
made it I just don't think that
this is right.
Thank you Mr thank you thank you
Mr.
Thank you I see no other hands
I'd like the opportunity just
offer some thoughts as well too
Senator Padilla
you become accustomed to working
with our committee and
oftentimes hearing comments and
then going back to doing work
and you've been good about that
we just tell you of some of the
comments made by the.
Senator Ivey Soto I share and I
think there may be some
additional commentary.
Your your bill on page two in
subsection a says that within
ten days or has to be a hearing
and of course the court counts
days for the non lawyers a
little differently but.
So here's my concern oftentimes
we we we see a lot of bills that
come here this is really for the
chief judge of or for the
justice senior justice
we get we get a lot of bills
here that say
that within five days the court
has to have a hearing within ten
days the court as to hearing
you'd be surprised how many
bills we get that say that and
of course the bills that that
include that language are my
Sanchez who realize the
importance of getting in front
of the judge very quickly and
and I understand that and that's
what you're trying to do here is
realize that this is a case that
has urgency in need to be seen
by a judge quickly the problem
is that we pass every bill that
does that.
The judges would never be able
to do anything except try to
decide which lot of following
which law not file because
between all of their other
duties and conducting trials and
all everything else on the
workload with the legislature
would have told them repeatedly
you have to have a hearing
within ten days on this we have
to have a hearing within ten
days that we have to have a
hearing within ten days of the
other and again every sponsored
thanks that that the issue
they're dealing with has that
level of urgency and I
understand that but I'm but I'm
always very very resistant to
bills that do that because I
understand how varied our judges
are with our caseload that we
tell them they must do things
within a certain period of time
and and we do that with without
this is a lot of discretion on
our end the the judges will will
we're setting them up for to
fail and so so I I I echo the
thinking of Senator Ivy Soto
that we have to really think
through the process you're very
carefully I did I did note some
of the same issues that when it
will be in paragraph this is
part of the hearing all parties
shall meet.
I circle that all parties
because of the question is who
are all the parties and I don't
know this is been brought up
previously but it does not just
gave me that sometimes you have
a father and a mother who may
have differences of opinion or
different households may not be
living together maybe may have
their own blended families and
and so when it says prior to the
hearing all party shall meet the
question is will who are the
parties is a mom and dad and mom
and dad are divorced or not
living together did you have to
have all from there and so I
think that'll be an important
thing for you to clarify in your
bill because it affects both of
them I think both parents.
The
Subsection ceases the parents
shall be given reasonable notice
of the hearing and again I I
think that we should specify how
that's to be done sometimes we
find that notice by reference to
the rules of procedure but but
the bill as it's written says
they should be given reasonable
notice and the and the justice
Vigil I I know knows and the
other lawyers and have that
experience we have that fight
all the time that somebody get
reasonable not as what was was
the written notice reasonable or
not and that that could lead to
some issues.
Subsection do
puzzled a little bit because it
it's it reads the petition filed
pursuant to this section which
we don't shall be accompanied by
a petition to name the parent or
guardian as a party.
To the petition so that if
you're very that literally that
so section do you would say
there's two petitions to be
filed a file a petition filed
presented this section should be
accompanied by a petition to
name so it's almost like there
has to be two petitions one one
petition for this proceeding and
one to name the parent or
guardian to the petition.
Of your subsection F. is the one
we talked about before the so as
the rules of evidence shall not
apply I'm gonna be able to be
persuaded by that I think it's
important to the judges have
these proceedings in a in the
bill more informal manner but
but to say they shall not apply
I think limits a judgeship and I
I usually think that we should
be which is our trial judges to
decide to what extent they have
to apply rules of evidence or
not they know they know when to
apply rules of it so they know
when not to apply rules that
it's but to tell them they shall
not apply the rules of evidence
I think that means that one
party can object when the other
side or or or or or or the other
side tries to say well that's
your state or or the other
things that we don't allow is as
rules of evidence so
those were some of my thoughts
you you up throughout the bill
also there's repeated references
to preponderance of evidence I
don't think that's necessary the
preponderance of evidence
standard is always gonna be
those of default standard in a
civil proceeding there may need
to be some clarification if
there's a question that this is
a civil proceeding but I don't
believe this is a criminal
proceeding and so so I think the
preponderance is a is a default.
I think you can tighten your
bill Senator with the with some
of the additional work if you
look on page three subsection J.
this is the court does not make
the findings under this section
initial dismissed the petition I
think that goes without saying
anytime you file a petition you
don't prove your case the court
can can dismissed the petition
this as of course shall dismiss
the petition the court might do
something else the court might
give the parties a chance to
amend or go back and and
supplement the record so I I
think that to to say the court
shall dismiss the petition is
probably once again to
Two more I have the authority of
the court and and I I hope
you're getting up a theme from
me here and I hope it resonates
well with the justice we hail
and the other lawyers I just I
have enormous confidence in the
judges to to do the right thing
and so to tell them when they
shouldn't or shouldn't dismiss
things when they should or
shouldn't use rules of evidence
when they should or shouldn't
have a hearing I think of.
Perhaps ignores the day to day
realities of of what those
judges have to do in in their
practice so those are just some
of my thoughts Senator I I from
up there because I know you
always want to know what what
would prohibit me or someone
else from supporting your bill
with the idea of maybe trying to
work on it more so I I wanted to
do that before we got to the
action of the committee so that
the you would have the benefit
of that.
So I think I've gone through the
committee members I've left
myself request for probably a
place where we should be
discussing motions members of
the committee on any motions at
this time.
Mr chairman of the table.
Is a tabling motion by Senator
Moores.
It's not debatable Emily will go
through a roll call of the
committee.
Senator Baca.
No.
Yes.
Senator.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
You're you're muted Senator Ivy
Soto.
Yes.
Yes.
Good of six to three send it to
fifty seven is table.
Thank you all.
appear both in support and
opposition.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee will take your
comments and at that look at the
bill and work with senator Patty
on it thank you very much thank
you the justice and all of you.
We're a I I know your intentions
are or.
Beyond any any question at all
thank you the next item up we
will here is Senate bill two
thirteen this is a Senator
Candelaria I see here here and I
see your of Mike is open and
year cosponsored also the center
how to meals with us as well it
would open his mind or you need
to open your mind Center
on a meal thank you and
We haven't seen the.
Everyone who's now with the
committee before this session so
again you'll have fifteen
minutes to advocate for the bill
so for eighteen and you'll
essentially have those fifteen
minutes to advocate as you wish
admitting any experts or others
who wish to admit and will begin
that way it for eighteen with
fifteen minutes Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee in two
thousand and thirteen the
American Bar Association
unanimously approved a
resolution introduced by the
national LGBTQ Bar Association
calling for an end to the use of
the queer panicked Defense as a
strategy in criminal cases.
Since then the district of
Columbia and the states of
California Illinois Rhode Island
Nevada.
Need a why a New York New Jersey
Washington and Colorado have
banned the use of such defense
strategies.
Legislation is now also pending
before Congress as well.
So what is the L. G. B. T. Q.
panic Defense we L. G. B. T. Q.
panic defense is a legal
strategy that asks the jury to
find that a victim's sexual
orientation or gender identity
or expression is to blame for a
defendant's violent reaction
including murder it is not a
free standing defense to
criminal liability but rather a
legal tactic used to bolster
other defenses.
When a defendant uses an L. G.
B. T. Q. panic defense they are
claiming that a victim's sexual
orientation or gender identity
not only explains but excuses a
loss of self control and the
subsequent assaults by fully or
partially quitting the
perpetrators of crimes against
queer victims.
This defense implies that LGBTQ
lives are worth less than others
that my life the life of my
husband.
Are simply worth less.
With me today is our the co
sponsors on this legislation
Senator Leo Hotmail as well as
C. Senator lista phonics I will
yield to the senators for as
much time as they will consume.
I know that Marshall Martinez Mr
chairman the executive director
of the quality New Mexico has
signed as as the speaker on the
bill as well and he may use
whatever time remains as he sees
fit he seeks to yield to any
other person.
I believe the committee in just
commenting on the structure of
the bill the structure built
very straightforward introduces
a new section of law.
Which provides that evidence
regarding that the the fact.
That discovery or knowledge of a
person's sexual orientation or
gender identity having a person
is not admissible in criminal
proceedings it does not take
away a person's right to assert
a defense of insanity or
diminished capacity it does not
take away an individual's right
to assert a defense of
provocation.
R. as a take away the defense of
self defense.
It simply as a matter of public
policy states in our criminal
law that LGBTQ lives are in fact
worth as much as any other life
thank you Mr chairman I yield to
senator Hyundai.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good afternoon now
when a perpetrator uses an L. G.
B. T. Q. paddock Defense they're
claiming that a victim sexual
orientation or gender identity
not only explains but excuses a
loss of self control and the
subsequent assault by fully or
partially including the
perpetrators crime against the
LGBTQ victims we're we're
sending a message out that that
LGBTQ lives are just not as
important as other lives when in
fact every life matters now as a
member of the LGBTQ community I
strongly believe this needs to
be addressed what our state
allows this defense to be used
in court it sends a disturbing
message about violence against
LGBTQ people is under so
understandable and acceptable
Senate bill two thirteen
recognizes the humanity of the
LGBTQ people and insurers that
homophobia and transphobia can
be used in court to justify
discriminatory violence this
bill will help to protect the
LGBT community with that Mr
chairman I yield to to Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics.
Mr chair I can rectify realize I
was going to speak I am the co
sponsor of this bill and I
support the efforts in the
dialogue that's occurred so far
we have seen some horrible
things happen in our state and
during the years that I was
first here in the
Senator a friend your friend of
mine.
Was burned to death in his.
Clarke for coming on to
somebody.
And his.
The person's defense was that he
panicked when he was approached
by a man and it just wasn't
appropriate thank you very much.
Thank you senator Senator a kind
about any others you like to
recognize you have plenty of
time you begin at four nineteen
you have fifteen minutes thank
you Mr chairman I would yield to
Marshall Martinez who is the
executive director of equality
New Mexico he will have the
repellents of our time if you
wish is to consume it you may if
he wishes to yield to others you
may I will simply let the
committee now in closing that
this legislation was unanimously
approved by the Senate Judiciary
Committee in two thousand
nineteen was also unanimously
approved by the Senate thank you
and it died on the house
calendar awaiting final approval
in the closing days of the
twenty nineteen session thank
you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Marshall
Martinez and I am the executive
director of the quality New
Mexico we are twenty seven year
old statewide LGBTQ civil rights
and advocacy organization and I
first want to thank senator
Candelaria Senator how to meal
and Senator cysts defend X. for
bring this legislation before
you.
I was a freshman in high school
when I found the words and
understanding to describe what I
had always known about myself
that I am gay.
Then Matthew shepherd was
killed.
The news of this murder the fear
instilled in me by this
atrocious crime stopped me in my
tracks from coming out to my
family or my friends in fact I
lived another three years
without telling my best friend
my mother that I was gay I
didn't do so until my senior
year in high school.
That entire time I believe that
my humanity my worthiness of
being protected from violence or
my access to justice after that
violence would be decided upon.
Based not on what happens to me.
Based on something I could not
control my sexual orientation.
People have have have long been
victims of in fact we've been
resilient survivors of violence
throughout the course of modern
history from the hate crimes we
suffered significantly higher
rates than are non clear appears
to the police station violence
we suffered through the age of
the Stonewall riots where modern
fight for liberation began.
In New Mexico we have taken
strong stands to support our
trans and queer community
including credit good hate
crimes legislation.
Prohibiting the so called panic
Defense is a critical step in
continuing this effort to
achieve liberation for queer and
trans New Mexicans.
Well trans women of color
continue to experience violence
especially murder at such high
rates it is appalling that we
would continue to allow the
alleged perpetrator of violence
to defend themselves by claiming
that they panicked because of
the sexual orientation or gender
identity of their victim.
That we would say this year
surprise revelation of our
sexuality could determine our
worthiness to live.
And I would just end by saying
as a thirty seven year old
openly gay Chicano man from
Alamogordo New Mexico.
I can promise you that there are
young queer and trans people in
all thirty three counties in
every single corner of this
state who still believe that our
worthiness to live that our
shared humanity is based on our
sexual orientation our gender
identity and the way our peers
and communities would respond to
that information about us
equality Mexico asks this
committee to pass this
legislation and make abundantly
clear to the members of our
community that our humanity is
not in question.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Martinez so Senator
Candelaria you the offered Mr
Martinez to use the balance of
the time that we set to hear
this bill well you still have
about seven minutes left you're
welcome to use any part of that
or we'll go next to members of
the committee there being no one
who is registered in opposition
Mr Chairman will yield the
balance of the time to the
committee thank you.
For any questions thank you very
much very good members of the
committee with questions
comments or motion Senator
Duhigg in center o'neill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators for bringing this bill
I think the the use of the where
panic defenses absolutely
reprehensible and and that this
is this is a good bill to bring
one small concern that I have
and and and I'm hoping you can
you can address that for me
Because I under this bill.
There would be no evidence
admitted in the defense just of
someone's gender specifically
and I'm just thinking of a
situation where you have perhaps
they are a woman who has has a
history of abuse by men and
something happens and she is in
a situation with a man wears.
PTSD is triggered.
And she kills that ma'am and
part of her defense is this this
history of abuse by then and and
that.
Being part of her mental state
my concern is that is that by
just having gender alone in here
it would it would prohibit
introduction of that evidence in
a case like that so I guess my
question is.
In other states that have have
adopted similar legislation have
any of the not specifically
included just a standalone
gender I as one of the the items
that they can't be introduced as
evidence and and kind of what
what the effect would be of
taking out just gender alone but
keeping gender expression gender
identity and sexual orientation
and this question eyes for
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator do heck
so to preface our discussion on
this point I think the
legislation has the limiting
condition that the evidentiary
exclusion is pertain solely to
the fact that the discovery of
the person's gender had on the
person as part of a strategy to
expat culpability so in your
situation.
in your situation if a person
was a starting a self defense.
Of the woman in this case I
think you know to be a self
defense strategy or perhaps a
diminished capacity strategy to
the PTSD that evidence would
still be fully admissible the
evidence that the person has
been subject to violent beating
I meant.
Is fully admissible
I think taking this to that
application of I were sitting as
a judge what what I say I would
say that that is all admissible
perhaps perhaps evidence
The PTSD was triggered upon the
discovery of the assailants
gender would be inadmissible but
I think in that particular case
it's rather a gym minimus
exclusion because the evidence
of the PTSD the defense itself
of self defense diminished
capacity as well as the history
of domestic violence by then
would certainly be admissible so
that's the best application of
the fax I could come up with
Senator not to your suggestion I
will say and I'm pulling up my
records we submitted this
language to the national LGBTQ
Bar Association receive their
support of the bill and there
was no sort of red flag raised
having tracked sort of this
legislation in other states and
that's not to diminish the
importance of the issue because
I think our job here is to
really try and think about all
the issues that could come up
The application the real world
application of the fence I've
not.
Scenic K. right where that is
been the application I cannot
say that it's not totally
available.
so that's the probably the best
information I have Mister
chairman Senator to.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
and I'm I'm actually I'm on the
L. G. B. T. our website right
now just kind of clicking
through their map.
And it looks like.
Most of but not all of the
states that have adopted
something like this do specify
gender alone
and maybe maybe only one does
not and if I may be.
I just Mr chairman senator I
think that the reason that night
its job just recalling the
conversations we've had about
this bill.
It's.
For trans people.
if you are transforming your
gender is a woman.
Right so there was sort of a a
problem in the law even in the
in the initial sort of attempts
to legislate in this area by
restricting at solely to sexual
presentation or sexual
orientation or gender expression
because that concept sort of
inherently endorses this concept
that a trans person's.
Gender is not their real gender
for a trans woman she is a woman
for a trans man he is a man and
so that is Senator I just
apologize that that is that is
the reason why that was that
as a report as a as a standalone
provision Mr Chairman.
And Mister chair I I Senator
that also makes me wonder
because I see that in some in
some states it's both both sex
and gender are are designated
separately hi is there.
Is there a need to do that in
this bill.
I don't believe so Mister
chairman because of the way that
we've subsequently defined
expression in the bill
so I don't think that there
would be a specific need to call
out sex as a separate concept
construct from gender in the
legislation.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have.
Thank you Sir do I have next
Center o'neill and Senator
Stewart before I recognize other
members of the committee on this
bill we make an announcement
that although we had been
scheduled to go to the floor it
I have been notified by the
president pro tem Stewart and
whether Majority Leader that
that we push back to six o'clock
give us a little bit more time
here in the committee this
evening to move through some
bills so please be mindful of
that please also note that we've
been asked by the sponsor for
house bill seventy five.
Of the medical malpractice
legislation.
Representative Ely to roll over
that bill so we will not hear
that tonight all right thank you
for the up side we're back to
Senate bill two thirteen I next
have Center o'neill and Senator
Stewart yes thank you Mr chair I
was going to make a motion so
I'll defer to a Senator Stewart.
pretend.
Mr chairman I was also going to
make a motion filed for back to
you defer back to Senator
o'neill well I thank you madam
pro tem I and making a motion
for to pass percent of bills to
thirteen.
Second.
Motion sickness or any other
committee discussion.
All right we'll take a roll call
and only if you would please on
Senate bill two thirteen.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes yes.
Your.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator server.
Yes Senator you have a do pass
on Senate bill two thirteen
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
You Mr chairman.
Very good.
Well next here.
Representative McQueen on house
bill two hundred.
By Representative McQueen are
you with us you and Senator
Stewart have house bill two
hundred.
Good evening chairman some
others
You senator handle with us as
well.
I can present a range present
issue is not that I know she
wants to make statements.
Looks.
We make sure she's not here.
I don't see her and the
conference perhaps.
Representative when you have
someone who might be able to try
to notify her I do Mr chair
rates proceed and she'll join us
from here okay very good.
House bill two hundred you know
the drill by now Representative
you'll have fifteen minutes to
present.
The bill to the committee it's
now for thirty eight.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee house bill two
hundred is a fiscal
responsibility bill clears the
way to invest eighty million
dollars in southwest New Mexico
will create jobs stimulate the
economy and provides and it is
wasteful government spending.
So in two thousand four Congress
passed the Arizona waters
helmets Act and under that act
state New Mexico got the right
to use fourteen thousand acre
pecan the water from the the
same Sisco based and I want to
be clear we didn't get.
Fourteen thousand acre pecan
Water Rights we have for the
right to use fourteen thousand
acre feet of water that does not
belong to us it if we were to
use it we would have to pay for.
We also receive money to build a
diversion from the river for use
on other water projects in the
region.
And we got the promise of even
more money if we figured out how
to use the water from the river.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we spent the next
fifteen years and we spent
fifteen million dollars trying
to figure out how to use the
water from the left.
And we came up with the.
When I say we I mean the state
of New Mexico in various
entities in the state of New
Mexico including a joint powers
authority.
There is a deadline to have a
record of decision under nepa by
December thirtieth twenty
nineteen.
That deadline was missed the
construction money which was
additional fifty seven million
dollars was lost.
That money is gone and will not
come back.
It's I need to make clear that
we didn't miss the deadline.
You could argue wasn't the best
process and I think many of us
with.
But.
You missed the deadline
Because we couldn't come up with
a good project.
We missed the deadline because
there is no good project.
There is no economically viable
way to use this water.
So it's time to move on.
In this bill does just that.
This bill takes what's left in
the fund called the New Mexico
unit fund.
In invested in southwest New
Mexico which is the counties of
requests.
Caption Hidalgo Luna.
As provided in federal law in
other water projects in those
communities.
It also makes it perfectly clear
that there will be no no New
Mexico unit and we don't need to
continue to hold those funds.
In the hopes that one day there
might be.
A couple things I'd like to
mention before I defer to Mister
witness commissioner Harry
Browne.
First the fourteen thousand acre
feet as I mentioned it's not New
Mexico's water in a lot of
people are like you know
direction is water is precious
and we can't let this water run
down the river to Arizona.
And I agree water is precious
but it's not our water in
peacekeeping in the river is a
good use of that water and the
river is an economic driver for
that region and will bring
people from throughout our state
to that region in from other
states to that region.
Secondly the federal law says we
can do this.
There is the suggestion that
we're required to use this money
for the New Mexico unit and the
New Mexico unit excuse me
federal law to the finds the
Hewlett diversions New Mexico
units of the central Arizona
project.
but the federal lawsuits we or
we can use this money in those
other and this means.
And finally there's a question
about.
Whether the joint powers entity
called the New Mexico captivity
is the.
For the successor to the
southwest water study group
which is named in federal law so
the federal lawsuits will spend
this money in consultation with
the southwest water study group
southwest water safety groups
long since the fund there's been
a couple of different entities
The New Mexico cap into the
entity was the entity needed to
develop manage and operate the
New Mexico units.
But that's not happening they
are not the entity nor the the
appropriate entity to advise on
spending the funds in that
region.
They're not inclusive all of all
the communities and they're not
inclusive of all the
stakeholders.
And with that Mr chair I would
like to defer to me my sermon
this.
Grant County commissioner Harry
Browne.
Mr chair.
I was awaiting permission to
talk but I'm hearing nothing I
don't know if that's my system
or not.
We're we're hearing you know
more senior commissioner thank
you Mr chair Representative
McQueen members of the committee
thank you for allowing me to
speak just Representative
McQueen mentioned on state
commissioner Grant County
commission this is my second
term and I EM speaking on my own
behalf the commission has not
asked me to speak.
but I am happy to report that on
Thursday of this week two days
ago we passed a resolution for
the one that I sponsored the
supports HB two hundred so we
are now officially on record as
supporting this legislation.
There's quite a bit of debate on
our commission about this and
that's primarily because of the
cap into T. is essentially a
local body in the water trust
board who would take over the
functions of the cap entity
would like to have of advising
the Interstate Stream Commission
is a statewide board with little
representation from this region.
That was a difficult day for me
as well to be honest in much of
our debate centered on a lesser
of two evils a sort of the
perspective of.
We are clear however at the end
of the debate that the sport is
the better option the cap entity
has a proven itself frankly
inept.
It has proven itself to be
overly focused on attempting to
divert water of the river
against all evidence especially
economic is that doing so would
never be a productive the would
never be able to find buyers for
that water.
And if there are questions about
why that's the case I'm happy to
spend some time on.
What I want to focus on is some
of the structural problems of
the captivity.
We need.
Another we're moving into a
phase were evaluating projects
from different counties in from
different types of water users
we need a body that is truly
objective to evaluate those
projects and recommend them to
the I. S. C..
Unfortunately the cap into T.
just is not such a body.
Not only has it been focused on
diverting water.
And not only has demonstrated a
lack of ability to recognize
economic realities.
But it is a vastly over
Representative of certain
interests and under
representative of others there
are municipalities in this area
that are not members of the cap
captaincy because they did not
want to be entangled in any way
with the diversion project.
There are your education groups
with only a handful of members
that have votes equal in weight
to those keys representing tens
of citizens and charged with the
general welfare of the citizens
not just profiting from
urination.
There's no reasonable
expectation that projects
proposed to the captaincy will
be evaluated fairly.
to great degree this is been
very much like a a family
struggle and
which really torn this community
apart and we have reluctantly
come to the conclusion that the
best way to move forward is to
bring in a neutral third party
much the way family counseling
does and you lie on them to
suggest to recommend projects to
the Interstate Stream
Commission.
Would like to add that the
resolution we passed on
Thursday.
Advocates that the Interstate
Stream Commission make available
support to small communities
small irrigation districts in
the like for planning and
technical expertise to be able
to submit projects to the water
trust board to be able to
compete with a large
municipalities and counties.
We believe that the water trust
board in the I. S. C. will
cooperate
in that regard and will make
such support available.
We have also urged the governor
to a user appointment power in
filling seats on the water trust
board to put representatives who
are from this area on the board.
And we look forward to having
that sort of representation as
well help us address the first
question I mentioned is that
this is a statewide but may not
a local body.
The total all of us here are
very anxious to start making use
of the eighty million dollars in
the New Mexico unit fund we have
communities the community of
Hurley is years overdue in
getting an independent water
source currently depends on the
money of the Chino mine run by
Freeport mac Moran for its water
that's an unsustainable
situation the community of
Hanover has run out of water on
one occasion and is currently
dependent on the neighboring
municipality Baird.
For its water we need to get
this money flowing to help those
communities develop reliable
water supplies we're confident
that the agricultural sector
will also be able to make use of
these funds for that purpose.
So I look forward to any
questions you might have for me
as someone who's been involved
in this issue now for a decade
and as a government official for
for five years
Thank you very much for your
time.
Mr chair if we have additional
time I'd like to deferred to Mr
again baskets.
Representative McQueen
informants left of the fifteen
minutes after that.
Thank you so much Mr chair thank
you so much Representative
McQueen and thank you
commissioner brown my name is
Kay Bacchus I'm a Las Cruces
city councilor I have been
following the Hewlett diversion
project in the eight up you're
saying cap and the progress for
the last five years and I have
seen unfortunately sixteen
million dollars of essentially
money that could have been used
already for critical
infrastructure projects for
communities like curly haired
Santa Clara damning
been been squandered away
consultants from out of state
have really bank on this project
attorneys have really bank on
this project and unfortunately
the cap energy over the last
several years has just refused
to consider other alternative
projects they have been really
depends on this diversion I'm in
Los crucis the outdoor
recreation economy has paid
dividends Mr chair I I know you
know the an act of the organ out
does picks national monument has
really.
A lot of visitation tourism
dollars and economic based jobs
to our city and the humor has
very much the same power to do
the same for Grant County in the
state and the surrounding
southwest counties but that'll
started having a free flowing
healer river and that starts
with having good critical water
infrastructure projects for some
of those surrounding towns in
Silver City and Grant County and
so the eighty million dollars
really needs to be spent I
really need to be decided how to
be spent by by the water trust
board by professionals who
understand the no water needs at
in New Mexico and who who don't
represent a single interest
which unfortunately in this case
with the cap energy
it has just been ongoing project
after project is only going to
benefit a few people and not the
majority of the southwest New
Mexico residents and so for that
reason I urge you to please from
we support this I'm to create
healthy vibrant southwest
communities that have good water
infrastructure projects and we
can keep a free flowing Ruiloba
river that will benefit that
region
because it is a pride of New
Mexico and part of southern
pride of Southern New Mexico and
in fact I take a lot of
underserved used there on trips
to teach them about what are
free flowing river looks like
and so we don't want to take
that away want to spend our
money wise so thank you so much
chair thank you Representative
McQueen thank you that concludes
the of fifteen minutes so out
for the proponents
I'm told that there were were
individuals who called in
support no normally I read a
list of those individuals we do
we do not get a that total
number and maybe very late today
so I get that was so make sure
that we members know about it we
did not have any registered
opposition on the bill and so
next we'll go to members of the
committee starting with Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman so I was
going to read a statement from
Senator side Craig Hemphill she
is in the waiting room waiting
to be let in.
Apps we could let her and she is
the co sponsor with me for the
Senate at for the sentiment will
be achieved in a row.
Mr Chairman Senator I am in the
room.
You
Mr chairman are you ready for my
statement
yes it's very brief center
employee allow fifteen minutes
for proponents and there were
two speakers of already is the
fifteen minutes so please try
prime basically saying thank you
yes and Mr Chairman not as a
resident and senator
representing Katrin Grant and
Sikora counties for my family's
lived for hundreds of years I
just have a deep respect for the
healer river and its ability to
sustain our communities and the
livelihood Center district and I
believe that and help the
environment ecosystem is
fundamental to every New
Mexicans well being and I
believe that the eighty million
dollars that is left in the New
Mexico unit fund can go a long
way toward improving equipment
to pull water systems helping
farmers like my great grand
grandparents Juanita and and one
where the boss who had a farm
and ranch for many years
generations help them improve
efficiency again.
And X. factor natural
environment which is a
tremendous asset and a key
economic driver for recreation
and outdoor tourism so thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you thanks for your
contribution well we have Mike
open looks like it's been
corrected.
Well Mexico to members of the
committee other than Senators
tourism street at the floor
anything more.
Your muted Senator Stewart.
Mr Chairman
no I think it was presented well
and I'm happy to answer any
questions that of the other
folks can't but I'm sure they
can just roll them.
Thank you other committee
members questions.
Anyone else.
Before we go to motions I'd like
to offer a few thoughts.
Over the last several years
periodically I've chair the
interim committee on water
natural resources it's been a
great religion something I
really enjoyed and I've shared
it with so Representative
McQueen in alternating years
most recently in all of the
years that I chair the committee
during the interim I've insisted
that the committee go to the
Grant County area specifically
to deal with the left issue the
CAP entity the Arizona water
Madam etcetera.
And I did that for probably most
of the last ten years.
I did so in part because as you
those of you permanent earlier
committees watching this unfold.
Was really very dismaying I I in
all the years I've been twenty
years legislature I've never
seen a more a gregis failure of
government.
To watch in slow motion over ten
years the money being squandered
the opportunity in time being
squandered the money that was
spent on if I recall something
like two hundred public meetings
of tens of millions of dollars
to engineering consultants and
lawyers.
And everyone of those years
everyone of those meetings we as
legislators said this is really
going no where.
And you're gonna have trouble
meeting your deadline and we
begin saying that I receives
years before the deadline.
And everyone of those committee
meetings I said you know you're
not making progress you're gonna
run out of time when your
deadline and I gotta tell you it
it surprised me not one bit when
the deadline came upon us and we
didn't need it.
Now there was a suggestion
earlier and commissioner you are
there for all those meetings I
think just about everyone of.
in the end it was suggestion
that well that result was
inevitable there was never going
to be a good result I I really
have to disagree with that it's
hard to say that that we
squander what is it fifty seven
million dollars and in could not
have done a better job
and and insisted that the cap.
Entity do a better job in the
process be better if we yeah we
tried that we need to try harder
looking back in hindsight.
This bill we talked about the
importance of the deal and so
forth and that's important but
but I want to dig into the
specifics of this bill because
what really happened let's just
call it what it is what really
happened is that we had a change
in administrations changing
governors.
for most of those ten years that
we went down to Silvercity and I
complained about the lack of
progress in many of my many of
my colleagues to the state and
complain about the lack of
progress about the tens of
millions of dollars the dozens
and dozens alternately hundreds
of meetings that we're going no
place.
We then ended the Martinez
administration term we came in
with a new state engineer and
you governor and let's face it
one of the very first things
governor Lujan Grisham did was
to
take a very different position
than the prior administration
and she made it very clear that
the state of New Mexico is not
going to
align itself with those who
wanted to pursue some of the
projects that were under
consideration she was very very
up front about that and very
strong about that and things
changed.
In a matter of overnight and
literally a day or two I think.
the governor wrote a letter to
Congress I believe to the
congressional delegation
Washington DC that you did not
support
some of the projects that were
under consideration on the lower
river that changed everything.
Now this matters because this
bill proposes to put the charge
of this to the water transport.
And and we where the water
transport described as a
professional group and I I
support agree with that but we
need to recognize one thing the
water transport is a highly
political body.
My memory serves me right I'm
working from memory the water
transport to sixteen
individuals.
Most of whom are secretaries of
an administration.
For our appointees by the
governor I think ten of the
sixteen are either cabinet
secretaries operating on the
Santa Fe or are a public
appointees by the governor I
think she makes for four of
those.
That's important because in the
twenty years I've been here I've
seen I began with the Republican
governor and I follow that with
eight years of a democratic
governor and I follow that with
eight years of Republican
governor and now I'm in the
middle of a democratic governor
when you have administration is
changing back and forth they
changed the state engineer they
change the water trust board and
in this case I'm on the love
they change the entire policy
water
and the environment.
Water and environment are too
precious and too imported be
subject to the whims of one
administration or the next or
one appointed engineer or the
listening so well well I support
this bill in place in this.
Under the purview of the water
transport I want the committee
to think about two things first
of all to think that that is not
going to swing as the political
winds blow it would be foolhardy
number one.
Number two there is a solution
for us it's a solution that I
pursued many years without
success so far I hope that I can
get the success of this
legislature I usually got
success of the legislature I
could never get the support of a
governor which is to change the
composition of the water trust
board in a way that so much that
board is not subject to
appointment by the governor.
And that's not a reflection on
this governor or the last
governor or any of the other two
hi Sir would be for that it's a
simply reflection if the water
transport changes with each
governor on the board of the
membership the state engineer
David R. Walt Water policies
subject to changing every every
eight years.
The water is too valuable an
instance to permanent an issue
for us to to be
subject to the political winds
and so I hope the legislature
and I hope this governor will
support a look at the water
trust board in a way that that
has a lot of much more a long
term and far reaching
perspective then the next
election cycle in and I I leave
the committee with that and
support this bill thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
personal thank you for those
comments and and I agree with
you we need to find a way for
water to be politicized.
so that we can.
Plan for the future and and that
we can preserve the natural
resources our state.
And and so.
Up in in that regard I do
support the aims and the object
of this bill I.
If I do have a double question
put boxer.
You're making changes.
In this bill so I.
Shows I'm reading on page three.
One form or through the SEC's.
That money will fund shall not
be used a valid planning
construct the New Mexico unit.
Right so that's that's a pretty
declarative statement that.
The fund.
The actual unit is off limits.
that is that Mr chairman and.
That is the case.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto yes Mister chairman Senator
Ivey Soto I really think that's
going to be the case anyway you
know the construction funding
funding is gone there was no
record decision because there
was no viable project.
It's it's inconceivable to me
that we could build The New
Mexico unit.
In the foreseeable future.
And so I guess my my question
though is than welcome page one
line twenty four.
This is what we need to fund.
Is so call The New Mexico unit
fund but we cannot use the for
the New Mexico unit.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto I will let's change the
name of the fund but the name of
the fund is established in
federal law.
and it was nice to change it but
it didn't seem to be within our
capacity or treatment assessor.
We have the New Mexico unit fund
that may be used for purposes
other than but but but but
whatever Perseus for not The New
Mexico unit.
Mister chairman Senator Ivy Soto
that's correct that there is no
water settlements Act specifies
the New Mexico unit or other
water utilization projects in
that southwestern region.
Okay I I I understand that I I
find that odd.
But but I hear that that and
federal law and we're we're
we're actively or and they and
the purposes of the funding gap
The the
That that that.
But I I guess I identify the
questions about how the.
How the flow of money goes
because the best thing that the
that the trust board is is doing
appropriating in this in the.
this bill.
The.
I'll up.
That that that would give and
picked up by anybody else so
part of this this I think thank
you.
Thank you.
There's only committee
questions.
Motion that lotion.
Your Ivey Soto with a do pass
motion.
Second by Senator Stewart Emily
would you please take a roll
call on house bill two hundred.
Welcome.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez.
You know.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Baca.
So.
Senator Pirtle.
This yes.
Representative equity of a do
pass.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you centers.
With.
What.
Mr chair.
Yes Senator Baca.
Which is.
Senator Baca we look at the
recognized no I I thought you
were speaking in you were just
muted thank you for noting that
now I'm speaking with our staff
here give me just one second
please.
Do we have Representative
records.
Romero consider more.
House bill ninety six.
Anyone on that bill.
This bill ninety six.
That
New sim other yes I am just so.
Senator Moores are you ready to
be able to present House Bill
might just throw back out of the
capital so I'm not in my office
so thank you is Representative
Romero on.
And the Rikki Lee Travis.
Just calling for both in not
seeing them.
Let me suggest the.
So.
Let me take one other bill very
quickly I think it'll be quick
okay Mr record your hopefully
it's less Ivey Soto does some
make.
What we do is let me take
another bill then in the
meantime you can perhaps try
around of your representative
and supporters house that we
thank you perfect thank you
right well let's hear house bill
one forty six representative
Cadena.
Receive joined us
Mr chair I know the drill I need
to join momentarily budgets and
collector after port operations
at the administrative office of
the courts otherwise in ready to
proceed I'm house bill one forty
six is an air well as you are
likely familiar in the spring of
twenty nineteen the Supreme
Court did issue a decision that
pulled the magistrate courts
under the District Court what
this legislation does is clean
up the couple of remaining
statutes to finish that
transition
specifically this allows some of
the remaining duties to be
pulled back over for example it
allows the appointment of the
vote magistrate judge vacancy it
allows the district courts to
manage the budget because the
money's already moved over and
it allows them to more
efficiently higher and staff the
magistrate courts instead of
having to turn back to Santa Fe
because otherwise that's what
our statutes currently required.
I'm not sure Mr crack is joined
us Mr chair otherwise yes yes
I'm agency director clack is
there anything you'd like to add
before we go to questions.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee yes my name is Jason
Clark I'm the director of court
operations for the
administrative office of the
courts
and I just add that the
consolidation process was be
gone back in two thousand
eighteen and it involved
meetings and collaboration with
all levels of the Courts
from judges to court staff we
had several meetings leading up
to the pilot program and then we
had a a pilot program in the
twelfth judicial district which
ran for almost a whole year but
not quite a whole year and then
it was roled out and some other
districts before the
consolidation took took over and
all of the judicial districts
and we've been successful is
consolidated since two thousand
nineteen and we just need these
the statutes to be amended so
that the the statutes
aligned with the supreme court's
consolidation order and that in
so that the I just records can
more efficiently and effectively
manage the magistrate courts
this year not to give any other
additional
duties to the district courts
and without all stand for
questions thank you thank you Mr
Clark and with that Mr chair
we're we're complete.
Thank you Representative and I I
have no registered opposition on
this bill.
And so with that we'll go next
members of the committee with
questions or motions members of
the committee one one forty six.
In a motor pass.
Why do passed so do best motion
by Senator the Soto a second by.
Second.
Senator Stewart the protests.
Memory would you call role on
defense motion percent one forty
six welcome.
Yes.
Yes of course what is this
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator this yes.
Representative any of a do pass.
Thank you committee thank you.
Hello we're going to all six to
be on the floor
Senator Morris how are you done
with rounding up your team on
how they actually both said that
they were in the waiting room Mr
chair yes I'm here to share my
plan will be to try and hear
both house bill ninety six and
then Senate bill two seventy
nine that should probably take
us to six o'clock.
But I'll keep a tight watch on
the clock for that so Senator
Moores let's begin with you
thank you Mr possible ninety six
thank you Mr house bill ninety
six is a bill that we've seen in
the Senate twice already and
that we have passed it through
both chambers are ones which did
receive a governor's veto would
September deregulation license
to work on their issues also
twenty six cut deals with
felonies our state licensing
boards not being able to
discriminate against those who
have had their phone use and
under time and finish all their
senses and prevents the
licensing boards from just you
know where we stand at your map
the license unless it actually
the phony was related to the
profession so this is one of
those interesting bills were to
libertarian like me comes full
circle around to social justice
side in our side with
Representative Romero is more
fun to work with someone chair
representative Romero and then
Rikki Lee Chavez is our expert
witness Mr chair.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee I just want to add to
the journey that we've been on
this for context as to why this
is important today one out of
five Americans needs a license
to work the same data applies to
our state meanwhile we're
training folks in our
corrections department to do
things like cut hair packaged
goods it cetera and yet they
can't get a license to do that
in our state currently if they
have a felony record with any
systematic approach
additionally I want to three
Americans I also has a criminal
record so therefore you know
we're prohibiting folks from
accessing these jobs this is a
means to an end for folks who
are seeking a better life and of
course upward mobility so with
that Mr chair looking forward to
your questions and to getting
this bill to the governor's desk
yet again with the amendments
that we've made in the
the focus conversations that
we've had thank you thank you
Representative and Ricky would
like to say anything.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee of
Rikki Lee Chavez legislative
coordinator for the New Mexico
called defense lawyers
association I appreciate the
work of the Sanchez and our
colleagues at bold futures as we
work to
address this concern I think the
Sanchez laid out Mr chairman and
where we've been on this journey
and I am here to assist in any
way if needed but I believe that
R. Sanchez
have have a good idea of where
we're at and where we're going
up based off of the feedback we
received from previous versions
of this bill.
We stand ready for questions Mr
chair.
Thank you I know it also we had
the registered as proponents
Barron Jones ACLU of New Mexico
Fernando Trujillo for both
futures so we thank them for
participating in their support I
have no registered opposition
we'll go then to members of the
committee.
Great questions.
Senator o'neill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
both Representative Romero and
senator Morris for caring this
so can you tell me what would
you change to make it more
amenable to the fourth floor
this go around this is an big
picture.
Terms.
Representative remember you want
to go for that since you just
meeting thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator o'neill so the big
compromises just including
basically a list of prohibited
offenses in in general for the
discretionary sort of
The building we're allowing it
to the point to have in general
I think it was mostly a
conversation of it just needed
to be had about our intent more
so than anything statutorily
that we had or had not
previously had in this
legislation although it is much
a bit more comprehensive than it
was in the past to include the
statutory changes that are
consistent with what you see
here today.
Thank you Representative and did
was there any up organizations
opposed to this on its journey
this building is currently Mr
chair Senator no in fact it's
been one of those interesting
built with
Americans for prosperity in the
coke brothers supportive
libertarians like myself
supported and social justice
warriors according to okay.
All right well thank you thanks
for carrying this both of you
good job.
Thank you.
Any other committee members with
questions.
Closure of the committee but is
moving too fast Mr chair.
So more to the do passed motion
joined in a strong bipartisan
fashion by Senator.
O'neill General Mills with the
second Emily would you please
call the roll on house bill
ninety six as amended.
No.
Thank yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Morris yes.
Yes.
Senator o'neill.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Moores you have with to
pass thank you Mr chairman thank
you colleagues will still
nineties sponsor Representative
Romero.
Well next year Senate bill two
seventy nine Senator o'neill
okay thank you Mr chair members
of Senate bill two seven nine
proposes to repeal the
osteopathic medicine act amend
the medical practice sexual
rights the New Mexico Medical
Board license.
Practice of osteopathic medicine
Mr chairman you have a we have a
committee so Senate Judiciary
Committee so but basically this
is we have an agreement between
of New Mexico medical board and
and the US your past and I'm
gonna just speak about the bill
in a general way and then I have
three experts but we're
committed to our goal is to take
seven minutes of our time okay
so you can hold us to that so
medical doctors and osteopathic
medicine work side by side in
the medical field and are
considered you know they're
they're equals offering Mexico's
quality healthcare they have
similar education training New
Mexico now has of course Mr
chairman you know well you
probably live fairly close to
that Burrell College down there
Los crucis more jury of states
have one medical board which
regulates both the sandy's and
the advantage of this is that
the New Mexico Medical Board has
an established staff of
licensing and best gory staff we
can take on the role of
regulating deos in the same way
they regulate entities so with
that Mr chairman members I have
secretary of Linda Trujillo I
have and your past Jeremy admins
and I have founder Frank on here
to answer questions and perhaps
for one minute find why this
bill is so monumental.
Mr chairman senators members of
the committee my name's Linda
Trujillo the superintendent of
the regulation licensing
department I'll defer to the
other it's expert witnesses on
the reasons why this is
important the regulation
licensing department stands in
strong strong support of this
legislation.
All right have a surprise
Senator Frank or doctor admins.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is Sandra Frank I
am the executive director of the
New Mexico Medical Board and we
worked very hard with the
osteopathic association and all
of the stakeholders the New
Mexico Medical Board regulates
about nine thousand employees
currently we also regulate a
number of other professions
medical care and and we stand in
full support we believe that our
staff which has the special
teach regulate physicians is in
the best position to regulate
osteopathic physicians as well
and we stand in full support of
this merger.
Dr Edmonds.
Yes Sir chair members of the
committee this is that your
journey admins I am the former
chair of the osteopathic
licensing board and we too are
in full support of support of
this legislation and yeah we're
really looking forward to being
on on an equal playing field
with the the M. dis we feel that
we are what striving for
equality which is what I think
the profession and the state of
New Mexico really wants thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr chair members if there are
people registered to speak you
can acknowledge their names but
as I mentioned we are I have a
committee subs percent about two
seventy nine.
So did you want to move that now
for a discussion Act.
That would be the right motion
Center owning.
All right so I moved.
Senate Bill.
Senate Judiciary Committee
committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy nine on Senate
bill two seventy nine or you can
do that better I'm sure.
Thank you want to have a motion
to do not pass Senate bill.
Two seventy nine but to to pass.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill to so
many.
Perfect thank you Mr chair but
that's mostly for the committee
any other question or debate or
discussion.
They want.
Right I just have a few Health.
I did this happen.
We we rarely if I have a hard
time remembering to.
professions that might be seen
as similar might be seen as
competitors might be seen as
overlapping
and for them to.
The side together collectively
on how to how to work this out
in a way that doesn't require
the legislators to pick sides is
yes highly unusual to me I'm I
I'm used to usually having some
challenges here so my my thanks
to all of you who are not
forcing the legislature to do
what I think we're we do poorly
which is to try and delve into
the intricacies of your
respective professions trying to
decide.
In our limited capacity me as a
lawyer and others with our our
own backgrounds trying to figure
out where one professional
practice begins or another one
begins where they overlap and
and shouldn't so of you've done
it right control the outcome and
that's a good thing so thank you
Mr chair if I may you know I'm
older than you but in nineteen
eighty seven there was this
harmonic convergence which
everything just seemed to work
out in that year nineteen eighty
seven okay and so I'm reminded
of that sometimes things just
work out some things just come
together not that this was the
thing I really want to think of
Secretary Trujillo and and the
osteopaths and Sundar Franken
you know there was spirited
discussion and debate and so
forth and and compromise but
that's Mr chairman that's for
that's what we like is
legislators what we don't have
to come in and referee a scope
of practice bill so thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of the chairman I do have a
small amendment however.
At because I do want this to be
co equal.
and so I am I am of putting on
the screen.
online thirty of page are are
yellow of the thirty line three.
Of the bill this described the
board and on the board it
provides that there shall be
eight positions on the board and
that at least two of whom shall
be osteopathic physician.
But the way it's written all
eight thirty osteopathic
physicians I don't think that
the intent.
And so for parity I'm suggesting
that we say at least two
approach I'll be osteopathic
position and at least two of
them shall be medical conditions
that will insure that regardless
of whatever the balance goes in
the future each side is
guaranteed the same minimum
level on the board and and so.
Well let me take that to our to
the Sunder Frank and Jeremy
admins do you see that as a
friendly amendment.
At the this is a this is doctor
admins yes chair and members of
the committee actually I I had
suggested that and and I I am in
full support of that amendment
okay great minds think alike and
then us under Frank.
Yes that that is a friendly
amendment thank you senator the
this is nineteen ninety seven
all over again that's on up so
anyway thank you Senator Ivey
Soto.
And that is a friendly
amendment.
And I also want props for speed
reading through an eighty four
page bell I don't know who bring
them and eighty four page
committee stop that's just
ridiculous for us to have to
digest that.
We never did that all the time
it was.
I just trying to stay up with
you you're the model.
Whatever
it.
That is a motion.
Good we're on a motion to amend
Senate bill two seventy nine
and.
The Sanchez indicated that it is
favorable on with his experts is
there any other discussion on
the proposed amendment.
The chair saying none is there
any objection to the adoption of
that amendment.
All right saying that amendments
adopted Emily please report all
those present on the committee
in favor of that amendment back
to two seventy nine now is
amended.
You have the talent and there's
nobody uptick in the floor I
would move a do not pass on
Senate bill two seventy nine and
a do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute presentable
to seventy nine what up one
point number up whatever the
point number SO that come what
they.
Do we have that motion earlier
from Santo o'neill really so
I'll take the years as a second
center and the Soto and will
proceed to a vote Emily if you
take a roll call please on the
committee says to two seventy
nine as amended.
I'm gonna have to.
Yes.
Center.
Yes ma'am.
Yes each.
More yes this so your was
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator about this yes.
Two seven nine committee
substitute as amended you have a
do pass thank you Mr chairman
and members to show me a yes
please right here.
Thank you.
The committee will give me just
about three minutes let me look
and see what we might still get
done between now and the for.
What does that if we're gonna
start departments the clock some
of us might like to.
Try to eat a little something or
take will break.
