If each kind of things you can
have as many people speak if you
want and that fifty minutes to
present it as much that
particularly if you choose to I
don't know is there anyone here
in opposition to the bill.
and I see none so we can
allocate our time accordingly
the president is with this and
I'm advised we're supposed to be
on the floor at seven o'clock we
have two hours so that should
give us enough time to log in
that fifteen minute presentation
and then offer questions and
perhaps some additional debate
discussion by committee members
of you've got fifteen minutes to
do with what you want.
Thank you very much chair
Cervantes members of the
committee we're here on house
bill eleven today thank you for
taking the time during a very
busy special session to hear
this critical bill out of
respect for the committee
procedures we have organized a
coordinated presentation today
between myself and my co sponsor
representative during guided us
I have I individuals will speak
in support of the bill who I
will call on in order a number
of these individuals with
individuals will have to join by
zoom us I hope it's working
because they're physicians for
currently caring for patients at
this time with your permission
Mr chairman I'll start our
presentation now.
The reason H. but HB eleven has
been introduced in this special
session is because the New
Mexico health care system faces
a very real crisis on January
first if we do not act today.
As changes to the medical
malpractice act or enacted
independent physicians who
provide services in hospital and
outpatient facilities and small
outpatient health care
facilities that are owned and
operated by independent
positions well I am so sorry to
the state multi million dollar
malpractice cap is been intended
only for hospitals malpractice
capital for which they cannot
secure appropriate insurance
under New Mexico K. five Mr
chairman independent providers
are being mistaken as agents of
hospitals and as such are made
subject to the four million
dollar cap as there will be six
million dollars that's assessed
during removal of the term a
parent agent and leaving on the
actual employees of the hospital
is being subject to the cap the
six is found on page two line
twenty five of the bill.
You must delay the
implementation of the forty six
million dollar cap not hospital
controlled outpatient facilities
to see if something can be done
to get them contracts to date no
insurance company in the country
will offer the four million
dollar policies to these
independent positions for the
application facilities the
current insurance in the state
will offer seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars of coverage the
cap independent providers fall
under at this time but will not
issue the four million dollar
currents policies practices here
today literally requested quotes
from every insurance company
that underwrites medical
malpractice insurance and they
were all on the successful.
How to prevent insurance Mr
chairman positions cannot and
should not practice medicine on
January first it's not safe for
the patients and it's not fair
to the providers.
House Bill Levin addresses the
two issues in the medical
malpractice act created the
emergency that will befall us on
January first I'm grateful that
the parties came together to
present to us the legislature's
solution that solves this crisis
I'm also grateful that the house
of representatives what was able
to compromise on amendment to
create stability for independent
positions over the next two
years as we work diligently to
solve the crisis in the long
term at this time I will turn it
over to my co sponsor
representative during practice.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee to echo
Representative Hochman Vigil we
have an urgent crisis that must
be that most trans and politics
in sixteen days hundreds of
positions in independent doctors
on practices we have to shut
down their businesses leaving
thousands of patients without
care I like to paint a picture
of what that'll look like thank
you meetings across America
across New Mexico specialists
and surgeons are are small in
number all in our communities
rely on a doctor in private
practice to serve on call
providers consultants and other
contractual services to local
hospitals for health care
services in sixteen days there
is if there is a car accident or
premature birth or heart attack
this decision may literally not
be able to answer the call and
care for a patient under the
twenty twenty one medical
malpractice act our independent
doctors agree to our parents
prepared to pay for higher
insurance premiums but no one
anticipated that the insurance
market will deny policies to
every single new Mexican
applicant under this new law.
If we do not fix this problem
now the needs New Mexican owned
independent physician owned
practices will stop providing
services and hundreds of New
Mexicans will be at risk for
serious illness life altering
impact and death all of our
communities will suffer the
brunt of these consequences I
urge you to pass house bill
eleven and I will turn back.
I will turn I will now turn over
back over to my co sponsor.
Thank you Representative
guidance Mr chairman at this
time I want to introduce our two
experts sitting at the table
with us today S. capitol for the
New Mexico trial lawyers
association Mr neck audio from
the New Mexico medical
association I'm also going to at
this time of call on.
Several positions that would
like to testify.
at this time I would like to go
to doctor Margaret Margaret she
feed from X. ray associates of
New Mexico and she's with us on
zoom and Representative could
you just give us the names of
everyone who want to admit on
zoom in order so we can just
plan for those that have been
teed up and ready to go and and
you're you're probably familiar
with the procedures that I
follow your I leave it entirely
up to you to cut people off to
recognize them as you wish so
user fifty method you choose
right so that that makes me a
good guy to have to cut people
off from zoom conferences and
you Madam time as you choose all
right thank you Mr chairman in
that case we're going to call on
Dr Chafee then on next will go
for southwest Gastroenterol
edgy.
after that we're gonna go to
usually on a group on behalf of
New Mexico trailers Association
she's here with us today.
New Mexico orthopedics Dr
Geoffrey rush for doctor bill
Ritchie.
And.
I think that is all.
Will determine you cut them off
when you choose to all right
thank you Mr chairman that will
go Dr McKee Senator cafe so
right.
I yes I could pronouncing it
incorrectly my apologies
current market cafe you're more
cafe all right.
Sure
the president let's associates
New Mexico.
This and then breast surgeons.
Throughout the state from
Tallman.
As.
We.
We all need and breast surgery
services to seven hospitals.
That's.
Los Alamos so as much as forty
years.
Looking at the advertising show
some of those serving our
missions as physicians and.
From the Santo.
Well to Sam's club and Justice
what is legislative procedures
and on breast cancer surgery
without adequate malpractice
insurance.
On some of these
this question to those patients
and hospitals.
Not services and director Ron
let me want to honor our mission
rose keep so.
Support.
Thank you.
Representative Representative
doing just go on yes Mr chairman
thank yous and mention next
southwest Gastroenterol logy we
have them.
Southwest Gastroenterol logy.
Dr Michael thank not to make
them does that sound right Dr
Michael bay all right yes.
Thank yes doctor.
I'm sorry I'm at SMC
When we start my name is Michael
may.
And I am a master averages with
southwest gas from.
A small independent medical
practice.
Mexico residents from across the
state for over forty years and
currently provide quality care
to over sixty thousand
individuals and.
How many others are facing the
painful reality that.
Not be able to provide medical
care starting January first
twenty twenty two.
We have to notify our patients.
To transfer to one of the
hospital reported gesturing onto
practices.
Procedures done at the hospital.
That is possible given the
current state of the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
We've
for our mailbox insurance.
Unable to secure insurance at
all.
House the most passed to survive
this crisis.
This practice medicine patients
just.
Mexicans need us thank you thank
you doctor for being with us you
had next listed Giuliana coop.
Chairman actually can I please
go to any young of New Mexico
Medical Society first before Mr.
She's zoom.
I was to use the help not she's
present for you of right.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Danny
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Andy young
and I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico Medical
Society the New Mexico Medical
Society was established in
eighteen eighty six.
And speaks on behalf of more
than three thousand members.
These members represent rocky
mix physicians those are
independent and those who are.
Hospital.
I urge you to vote yes on house
bill seven without conditional
amendments.
The emergency fixes that are
outlined in this bill do not
pass New Mexico faces a health
care crisis that have severe
consequences on the lives of
thousands of New Mexico
patients.
We have worked closely with
trial attorneys and other
stakeholders to recommend
specific language that addresses
the most severe and urgent the
consequences of the medical
malpractice and.
We appreciate the sponsors of
the bill recognize the sexes
must happen as quickly as
possible.
To be clear this is not an.
Our extensive insurance premiums
this is a crisis because our
physicians cannot secure
insurance at all.
We must ensure there are doctors
hospitals and years and.
We must ensure our independent
session outpatient facilities
remain open on January first.
House Bill Levin in its present
state is the only reasonable to
ensure our independent
physicians may continue to
practice medicine.
Start of the new year.
We would not be here this for
not to mention.
We appreciate the opportunity to
work with.
All those who are here to
present these amendments.
And San is a very real problem
thank you thank you.
And then I go to Mexico Mr
Chairman.
Second.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Julie on a coop on
behalf of the New Mexico trial
lawyers association we support
house bill eleven passes I want
to honor the timing and the
energy that so many different
parties came together to draft
taxable seventy five but also to
be here to dating three men and
we hope that each of you will
help us honor that thank you.
Mr chairman that concludes our
presentation we stand ready for
questions thank you for your
present
sort of couple minutes and a
half but since you've got no
opposition we will go to members
of the committee.
We got we got everybody want to
hear from on zoom your bill's
good to have equipment mounted
just off.
A prominent.
That's good.
What we Soto and other members
of the committee to see sure
have sex starless.
With that in this part of the
part of it we just have to help
you have a history of New Mexico
medical Representative.
Who's a question directed to
you.
Yes.
No but there are all those are
just the up.
Mr Chairman it it does it does
seem like as I as I read.
The results well it does seem
like there's a there's a
sequence the problem.
That if left intact the the the
very filled that they are
worried will go into effect
general one most of the affected
everyone.
at least as I with the law the.
House bill seventy five had an
effective date of general one
point twenty two and so if we
passes within Mexico laws
because in fact nearly upon the
city for the governor.
Then the tax is going to fact.
Prior to house bill seventy five
going into effect and the
general one.
House bill seventy five will
still go into effect as I as I
look at the the sequencing of a
and Mr when I don't know if
you've done the same thing or
not.
The reason same conclusions that
there are some problems with
sequencing I agree that part off
I hope we can deal with those or
are we going to.
We'll go back to the council
with more detail please to.
Others on the committee.
There's no big surprise I've got
a proposed amendment I hope
Senator Ivey Soto that addresses
some of those things but I do
agree with you there are some
sequencing and date things that
just don't work Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
Yeah I.
I know that this this is a real
issue that is is facing not only
healthcare providers but also
patients because it is both
patients and healthcare
providers who are protected by
the insurance that is to be in
place here
and.
It's been wonderful to see how
the the different stakeholders
of this issue have have worked
together we're working together
with a two seventy five and and
are working together now
I wanna I wanna make sure I
understand kind of the time
frame of what were we talking
about my understanding is that
correct the US.
The superintendents call comes
at the insurance rates in
October and after that was one
this issue arose is that
correct.
thank you Mr chair and us
Senator Duhigg Mr till is here I
believe that's correct but but
we might as well take advantage
of of him being here so you can
answer a question as to whether
or not there's a connection with
when the new rates became
effective and when this problem
began to manifest.
Mr chair of the special person
for having.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it is correct that the
current law state.
The rates have to be set up on
October thirty one they take
effect on January first of the.
You next year.
The plan arose.
I think that what the actual
setting in the range the the
problem arose when the medical
malpractice insurers there are
many of them I looked at it and
realize that there are positions
through the secretary to the
have perhaps.
And they were willing to write
rates.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
superintendent.
I'm wondering have have if we
weren't here doing redistricting
right now.
What would you will be doing our
how could anyone requests.
A special session for the
governor of her from this I mean
what what what what would happen
if we weren't already here.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
Senator I suspect you know the
the of providers we're being
denied their the insurance and
so the governor would have had
to call us into special session.
I understand that the in working
together.
The the stakeholders here have
have come to a a series of
agreements and I and some of
those are reflected in what we
see if the three hundred and
some are not
is that kind of unwritten
agreements that carry over from
H. two seven five and I I would
love to hear in committee
tonight what all those
agreements are there part of us
that these are very much I
between the cycle is not not not
amongst the Legisla- like
legislators so I don't know if
the if the folks who were
involved in those can kind of.
Go through those for us Mr
chair.
Senator I do think that's
precisely why are two experts
are sitting beside us today and
I'd like to defer to them
We start with okay but Senator
serve on this and and senator
thank you for asking that
question that it really is
remarkable how will these
parties have worked together and
indeed we have come to an
agreement
which expressly is that what
that what the medical society
needs of their constituents and
frankly patients to to make sure
that they get the cover the the
health care that they need is
they need some time so that we
can figure out what is going on
with insurance companies and why
can't we get coverage for these
outpatient health care
facilities we know hospital
outpatient facilities have
insurance we knew hospitals have
private insurance we don't
understand why the outpatient
health care facilities can't get
the insurance and we don't have
time to figure it out and so
that is why we all became
concerned because we want
patients to have health care and
we want doctors to stay open
that everybody agreed to when we
do is we would postpone.
The implementation of the higher
path.
independent physicians this
position owned outpatient health
care facilities so that we could
have a year to see what we can
do to get insurance and then
also a session the sixty day
session so that if we can't get
insurance we can get the problem
fixed in the bill and so the
beer the agreement was if we
open up this bill in the sixty
day session it would be for the
purpose of fixing this problem
and there was one other side
issue which is extremely
unlikely to happen which is if
the court of appeals or the
Supreme Court interprets the
definition of occurrence to mean
something different than what
all four parties who negotiated
HB seventy five intended then
the medical society made it
clear that they were going to
open it up for that as well but
we we all we all agreed that the
otherwise we're gonna let the
long play itself out and see how
it works it was heavily
negotiated among hospitals
patients trial lawyers and the
medical society including back
and forth language up until it
went to committee.
and everybody has agreed that
we're going to and see how that
shakes out no I understand that
the Medical Society can't
exactly promise the the dentists
will come and say now we want to
get in but that the parties have
an agreement and we intend to
stand by it.
There are there any other
details of the agreement that
that we can so for example you
said.
Actually before I get to that
here's my concern is that.
Whether the dentists are asking
to be in a more of a concern
that I have received a
communication that refers to.
All of them have expressed I
Medical Society to do a broader
a broader broader changes to
medical malpractice act in
twenty three that would go
beyond this agreement that the
you've just laid out which would
be the only opening about about
for the purpose of addressing
insurance issue for this
occurrence issue and so I'm
concerned that.
I'm concerned that I want to I
want everyone to know what the
agreements in place R. and B.
Hall to them going forward and
so.
To that end hello
Mister chair if you can we can
that for us.
Just that Sir yeah Mr chair
Senator Duhigg
miss loves recitation of the
agreement was accurate I do not
take issue with what she said
it accurately tracks the
agreement that the medical
society has agreed to to get
this very urgent issue resolved
the only other thing that that I
would flag and I think everyone
on the committee recognizes that
is there's also the agency issue
we have to deal with it's not
just outpatient health care
facilities that can't get
insurance in the in H. B.
seventy five definition of an
independent provider agents were
specifically excluded which
would have put them under the
higher cap the four million
dollar cap and those individuals
who could be deemed agents
independent physicians providing
services in a hospital setting
they also cannot provide
insurance so adding that
everything this love said tracks
the agreement we've reached
which we intend on expanding the
today.
Mr chair thank you and have a
pleasure for I.
What
about sexual.
Representative thank you Mr
this.
So.
Mister chair Mister.
Am I correct in other taking the
the occurrence part out of the.
The what we're talking about
here these are insurance
problems right.
Mr chair Senator do that yeah
that.
So.
With the.
What I don't want to see happen
is that the medical malpractice
that I.
Is being continually.
Re opened and a change in ways
that.
Would take away some of the the
great
improvements that you all made.
Last year maybe seventy five to
deal that insurance session.
So I would like to see those
issues dealt with not in the
medical malpractice and I'd like
to see them dealt with and our
insurance statutes I'd like to
and I'm I'm six out of the
superintendent of schools here
because what I'd also like to
see is an agreement from the
party is that rather than just
simply jumping to changes in the
legislation if if for some
reason.
What what gets passed here does
not fix this insurance issue.
That.
Superintendent till work with
the parties all those I'm sure
he would love to do to resolve
this through the us all I am
through regulation to the
reading and go through that
process before jumping to
additional provided.
Is that something that.
Mr chair that that the parties
could agree to do today.
Mr chair Senator do that yes and
we we've already throughout the
the last couple weeks here we've
been exploring those avenues to
determine if there's a
regulatory fix that can address
this problem or another Avenue
and that's part of of why we are
requesting the delay so we can
explore all avenues I'm not
dressed reopening the act but to
see if there's another Avenue by
which we can address the issue
we have been on able despite
working with both department of
health and the off the
superintendent of insurance
we've been unable to to find
that path forward as of now but
will continue to work.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
audio I and you mention this so
the so you all very much was the
exception to July twenty twenty
twenty three.
Mr chair Senator due to the
original agreement was July
first twenty twenty three
correct it was an amended on the
house floor to Senate to July
first twenty twenty four.
Mr chair representative thank
you that's that's what I'm kind
of what I'm getting at it the
fact that it's now twenty twenty
four that it was not the
agreement of the parties and and
I was a change a legislative
change right.
Mr chair and senator do you
think that is correct although
party the two parties you see
here the table were present when
it changes proposed they did
reach out to the various
stakeholders who protected the
original agreement and we we did
not do it without the blessing
of everybody that needed to be
involved at that time.
Thank you Mr chair thank
representative so.
To the extent that you all have
committees handshake agreements
about when you will and will not
be.
Looking back into.
Doing legislation have those
time the agreement timelines for
those agreements been adjusted
the same way.
The bill also tested for.
Mr chair Senator do have I'm
sorry I don't follow which
agreements with other so it
sounded to me and I'm sorry Mr
chair representative me like
there was essentially a
handshake agreement that.
If that whatever is yes here
doesn't it doesn't fix the issue
of of folks being able to to get
this coverage that you would be
looking at the twenty three
session title to make additional
changes has that agreement about
change to not the twenty three
sections of the twenty four
sessions since we have.
That since the house has
extended the deadline all the
delay over all thank you Mr
chair Senator Hey I'm all for
you know different experts but
my understanding of it is the
agreement was reached so that we
would have access to a sixty day
full policy session to make
these changes if need be I'll
also defer to my experts if you
want to add anything Mr chair
Senator Duhigg that's my
understanding is that it's our
intention if more changes are
needed they'll be addressed in
the sixty day session on twenty
twenty three so that time line
has not changed in the.
Mr chairman strongly I I think
it should I think if we are
giving the providers an
additional year to see to see if
there's a way to work out this
issue then why.
Why are we not also taking that
full extra year to to to do
everything necessary short of
legislative changes to try to
address that issue Mr chair
Senator Duhigg of a concern we
have is that currently as
amended coming out of the house
the the
the the deadline is July one of
twenty twenty four
as OSI has informed us because
policies are written on a
calendar year we need to have
this issue address before
calendar year twenty twenty four
begin.
if if we wait until the the
twenty twenty four session to
address the issue
Those providers who are at that
issue will not be able to get
insurance coverage for the
calendar year of twenty twenty
four so that is why we want to
address it if need be in the
twenty twenty three section so
that those policies can be in
place for twenty point four.
Mr chair Senator thank you.
Love you if you had mentioned
that part of the other the other
grievance you all have made was
around the interpretation of the
current
my mic my attention here today
is for all agreements to be made
clear on the record so can you
go into more detail about that
and and the other treatments
that may between the parties
that are is not reflected in the
legislation.
Services sirventes and Senator
direct I appreciate you
clarifying this and so the the
issue around the currency is
really a non issue because it's
extremely unlikely to happen
the the medical society and
doctors were concerned that
perhaps the original intent of
all of the parties of HB seventy
five might be read to allow more
and more occurrences than was
intended under the bill and so
so we all agree on with the
language we think says we all
agree on what the intent of the
language is the exception to our
agreement that nothing else will
be opened up in the act is that
if for some reason the court of
appeals or the Supreme Court
interprets H. B. seventy five
not the old malpractice act
because there is litigation
around the definition of
occurrence in the old
malpractice act but if the court
of appeals were to here that
issue the definition of
occurrence in the new
malpractice act before
the before the twenty twenty
three session that the medical
society would be able to come
forward and say we also need to
address this definition to make
sure it meets the intent of the
parties the reason that's not
likely to happen is because
there's been no malpractice
under the new act yet so it
would have to be a January first
infants somebody has to sue and
has to get litigated and then
appealed to the court of appeals
or the Supreme Court and get up
and opinion down before the
session comes up and that's just
not going to happen it's just
that it would be it's just not
gonna happen the timing would
not be would not work that way.
Mr chair thank you love that
that's real helpful so just to
clarify.
The agreement that you all have
is that if that if if something
happens within that timeline
that there will be there's
agreement that the medical
society could come forward to
reopen litigation that I'm sorry
legislation
in the twenty three session but
this is not an open ended
agreement to come in and address
this at any time in the future
is that correct.
Maybe maybe absolutely.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg the if
the agreement is that if it if
at any time an appellate court
New Mexico.
Interprets the definition of
occurrence to means something
other than what the parties
intended then at that time the
medical society can revisit the
definition of a public.
Okay Mister chair Mister of
thank you so.
To me that.
That was a lot very much my
understand from from a miss love
just
because that that is different
than something happening within
this kind of strict short time
timeline that is that is a much
broader.
issue.
There's been a couple references
to what the parties intended
what did the party sometimes.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg the
intent of the definition of
occurrence was to capture the
fact if if there is one injury
that occurs
that equals one occurrence under
the medical malpractice act in
other words if you have a
surgery that's a program and the
patient is injured during that
surgery but there are two nurses
involved and one surgeon that
does not equates to three
individual occurrences that is
one of four.
and I'll defer to miss love if
if she agrees with that.
Also Mr chair and
I don't really know who would
answer this but so so what's
what's going to happen over the.
I just.
Under currently is that.
Two one half years.
To address to address this
issue.
Short short of our legislative
changes.
Sort of legislation I'm sorry is
chairman and senator.
Four of legislative change order
legislation
you mean if this bill does not
go through.
No if the bill does get through
okay so what our hope is is that
we can number one gather some
more information from the
insurance companies about what
is their concern is that the
they are not doing as
assessments for independent
owned outpatient facilities
because they haven't had to do
them before and they didn't have
the time to do it I don't know
if that's one possible answer
so what we're going to have to
do is is get the people who have
some swayed with insurance
companies to figure out what the
problem is in our expectation is
that we can find that out within
a year everybody's motivated to
do so which is why we have the
agreement so that it would go so
that the delay of the
implementation of the higher cap
for independent owned outpatient
facilities we go through a sixty
day session and into the the
middle of the year because we
figured the year is what we need
to figure this out and the
session is what the outpatient
facilities need if we find out
there's some problem with the
law that is causing the opioid
via insurance companies to
refuse to issue policies so that
is why we have all of this group
agreements through the sixty day
session into July of twenty
twenty three now that was
changed on the floor under
circumstances where we were
concerned that we didn't have
the votes to save patients and
doctors January first.
Mr chair representative thank
you.
It's.
I mean I what I hear you saying
is.
We don't need the secretary here
that was added on here that was
that was that was a that was a.
A political issue both of but
it's not actually what's
required and so.
It I would like to see that
removed
And.
And for that of another
procedure to to justify remove
off at all there's a supplement
and a half probably unnecessary
Six.
Okay Mr chair think that's all I
have the thank you Sir do let me
just you know make making things
as far as I can as I've told
everyone I've got a proposed
amendment I've shared it with
this Sanchez I know with not as
much time as they would like or
I would like for the committee
we'll go for it we've got plenty
of time for the rest of my life
it does address I think you're
issues etcetera offered for
reasons because we all I think
everyone hear chair of the fact
that we got to take care of this
in this session I'm not proposes
the committees of although that
would normally be my practice
because we would want to have to
have this go back to the house
process especially since you
will decide to take a vacation
for the.
Just teasing just teasing.
but the way that we do we don't
have to restart in the house
right so we've we've written it
as a matter.
Senator and I think that's a
legitimate important issue that
was once a time with the night
vision me just make sure well
we're gonna go back and forth I
think a lot tonight on this
issue so I want to just get the
first crack at it for everybody
on the committee then I'd like
to offer some thoughts and maybe
come back around the time so
let me just do that but you'll
forgive me for telling a story.
I like to tell the tri state
generation story this was a in
two thousand three we enacted a
water rights these legislation
may take you awhile to figure
out the relevant to this but I
promise it'll come around
eventually so we passed the
statute to do an educational
Water Rights their comments
about to litigation against the
state engineer and others on the
whole issue in the tri state
case was one of the legislature
intend what the legislature
statute meaning when they passed
this enactment in two thousand
three think about seven years to
get it all the way through the
court of appeals court deals
came back with a decision in two
thousand ten that's another two
or three years for the Supreme
Court to decide the case on our
about a decade after the
enactment and throughout the
entire process appeals reversals
apartments is the whole issue is
whether the legislature intent.
This was a huge morning water of
case involving tens and tens of
millions of dollars lawyers fees
I'm sure the tens and tens of
millions of dollars it took ten
years to get to the Supreme
Court and it always puzzled then
as chair of the water committee
adversaries always that you know
instead of litigating for ten
years and going through three
appellate levels and going
through tens and tens of
millions of dollars and goes why
did nobody ever wants to the
never did come back to the
legislature state what did you
intend.
I think I I want to tell the
story because well I appreciate
the suggestion that well let's
let's define occurrence in a way
that we all agree nobody could
really understand and let's wait
to see what the court of appeals
in the Supreme Court will do to
interpret for us is not with
this committee does.
this committee works to correct
statutes using put plain
language clear language to the
courts don't have to litigate
and reaching consistories also
depending on which judge of
which court which County which
part of the state you're in and
and we don't want to have to
wait for court of appeals and
Supreme Court cases that
sometimes take many many years
to get a definition when we can
do that here we can define an
occurrence here.
Let me be clear that that I
understand very well what
everyone assumed understands we
have to address the problem.
which is the agency issue and
the concern that independent
providers we have to have four
million dollars of coverage in a
couple weeks.
Of it's been described various
times here tonight is a crisis
it is a crisis why is it a
crisis well is in a crisis
because we originally had
unrealistic expectations of
doctors can get four million
dollars of coverage that's one
potential explanation maybe that
was unrealistic of us and the
people who wrote the law that
way back in February March what
were the other possibility is
maybe it wasn't unrealistic
expectations of doctors to do
that but we just we the language
was not is clearly written as we
would like and and now we're
here to try to fix that one
and and I think that that was a
factor of two things one it was
rushed and the time was not
taking them very frankly you all
heard me complain about this
this committee was told we could
not touch that agreement.
We were told everything I've
been worked out everybody was in
agreement everybody liked it and
we were told we could not dot
and I across the T. and you all
know that rub me the wrong way
let's just be real strict about.
It's not the way I like to
operate I've never done it
before.
But but I accepted that that
this bill was perfect
and and anything touching it
would be a problem.
And I bit my tongue and I regret
it and I've regretted it ever
since so I'm going to approach
this differently now and and not
rely as much on the fact that
there may be agreement on things
where I think there
are things we can do a better
this legislation but but let's
make sure again repeating we're
gonna leave here taking care of
those individual providers and
that's been the narrative but
I've heard the last week or
longer and consider doing gas
right question I've asked many
times you know what would happen
if we were here in special
session right now I never heard
there was a crisis and I'm not
saying there's not one but I
never heard of any crisis until
the last two or three weeks
and we're here so let's take
care of it of course but I don't
understand that this was brewing
in and maybe we would have been
called into special session to
address this one issue.
but I I wonder a little bit
about that.
The the the narrative has been
that this is a problem for
individual providers and we're
gonna take care of my keep send
that over and over but let's
let's be really Frank about
what's really going on here to.
this is about protecting
outpatient facilities that's
what this is really about is not
individual providers this bill
would delay the increasing caps
on outpatient providers by two
and a half years from the deal
that was struck.
There was a deal made back in
February March take outpatient
providers from seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars to two
million dollars in coverage and
this bill that was a as it was
originally introduced with a
delay that for a year and a half
and then with the floor
amendment deleted another year
after that.
First of all some of that
doesn't work because I think I
got agreement from everyone I've
spoken with the policies are
usually written on a calendar
year so the language in here
that maybe certain things
effective in July of a given
year would work because you've
got to do it from January to
February I'm sorry January to
December kind of perspective and
so we've we've got to tackle
that I think and I can be aware
of that but but you know to
delay outpatient facilities
coverage from seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars to four
million dollars in coverage and
caps were cap requirements of
for two and a half years I got
to ask myself why and and and
why of what is the deal already
on raveling it was made back in
February March.
And I I heard earlier
representation of the
stakeholders are all here but ms
Levin I and I'm sure others in
this room are stakeholders are
intermittent Representative Eli
others you know our stakeholders
of people that are injured and
killed
and my guess is they probably
weren't at the table and my
guess is that they would be the
persons who do not benefit by
delaying the cap on damages for
two and a half years from seven
hundred fifty to four million
dollars so I want to be here for
them and I know you do too much
love in in other the travelers
as well too I know to many here
I think so so those are kind of
my preface of remarks Senator
Ivey Soto makes a good point I
hope we're going to look at
something here just don't work
the dates affected dates and the
dates are caps on work let me
just give you an example.
If you look at the section of
your house bill seventy five
that passed earlier this year.
The the cap for individual
providers went from a six
hundred thousand to seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
right that was the intention to
the to take that cap off and and
that
was a section fifty one.
Forty one dash I dash six.
So we look at the forty one dash
five six and if you look on
frontier house bill seventy five
for one the windows the capital
up from six hundred seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
If you look at subsection Hey
the cap of six hundred thousand
dollars for this year for twenty
twenty one.
But if you look at subsection
beat the cap went to seven
hundred fifty thousand four and
say when that became effective.
So arguably the cap went to
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars when this law became
effective with house bill
seventy five became effective
which would have been a but July
one of the issues.
So individuals providers are
probably already at seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
arguably the somebody died or
was or was injured in the last
six months of this year and I
don't see anything in subsection
B. that says when that.
East wind up other than the
effective date of the bill.
So we have unless somebody can
reconcile that for me I don't
see how you reconcile the
inconsistency between subsection
eight the cap of six hundred
thousand dollars and the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollar
cap and subsection B..
We're we're in the act and the
enactment of house bill seventy
five is the same when the cap
went from six hundred to seven
fifty.
Maybe Mr chairman that's a good
point raised in we actually been
going to the bill this law would
like to answer that question for
you.
All of those.
It also noticed that the
effective date of section three
of that act the general one
twenty I try to.
Well I'm.
Yeah thank you for that so so
that's right so that been makes
let's see so it would be what
what was that again general one
twenty twenty two is the
effective date for section three
of the bill right now that would
be January twenty one coming up
in a couple weeks correct is one
seven fifty would become
effective as of right well then
then we have the the issues
between subsection a and B.
which I think Miss love is going
to dress but but but the section
as a whole does that a lot
general one twenty twenty two
this particular section parts of
the bill went into effect July
one parts of the of the bill
the last parts of the bill go
into effect general one coming
up.
Senator someone to send and then
tear Committee
indeed the law went into effect
goes into effect January first
twenty twenty two section eight
addresses the fact that nothing
changed prior to January first
of twenty twenty two so keep in
mind that.
Even though an incident may have
happened within the last few
weeks or last year or even
between now and December thirty
first of twenty twenty one.
not infants will have to be
filed under the full happen so
that's what this section Hey is
addressing an injury that occurs
between now and the end of the
year will be under the old cap
of six hundred thousand dollars
that's why a addresses that.
And then immediately beginning
January first of twenty twenty
two incidents that occur during
twenty twenty two will be
subject to the higher cap.
Both units are a result of let
me let me find can have as much
love the music review referred
repeatedly to incidents of I'm
gonna use word currents is that
this it is are you use those
words interchangeably no I'm not
okay R. so and occurrence
matters and we can talk a little
bit already about the importance
of the definition of occurrence
because the the caps related to
a given cap on given the current
do we agree on that I see on the
heads of so often the simple
I've I've given what we've
talked about this in the offices
of surgery where a surgeon
disincentive Esponja patients
negligently that's a malpractice
of that and then there's a
subsequent surgery in the
patient suffers of the lesser of
artery laceration as a and as
far that surgical procedure to
remove the funds that are given
we will talk more about it
arguably that's a second
occurrence which means a second
set of caps on the damages and
and the the to the concern I
have with the way that purpose
was to provide back in the
regular session is that it mixes
both concurrent and successive
for future language and so the
funds as a separate occurrences
in the current occurrences and
so forth and I I appreciate the
suggestion that well we'll we'll
we'll hope that the courts will
interpret that for us at some
point in time but but I find
resistant to that sure you
understand how may that pretty
clear R. I don't want to wait
for the courts to interpret the
definition of occurrence when we
should spend more money to do
that well ourselves here.
Yes.
I I want to note and and I asked
I asked of the liver to give me
a copy of house bill seventy
five from last year.
I will not as I'm as I'm not
reading a and B..
Of section three on that bill.
It's six hundred thousand
dollars per occurrence for
malpractice claims brought
against health care providers in
subsection may.
Subsection B. at seven hundred
fifty dollars per occurrence for
malpractice claims against
independent providers.
And and that's that appears that
after.
And then and then.
I don't know where it comes in
for health care providers.
After January one hundred after
general one twenty twenty two.
Because of section see is a
hospital or outpatient health
care facility.
But I don't see the language of
a health care provider.
As I'm as I'm going through this
Mr chairman of the president's
love for them to the yes Mr
chairman and senator Ivey Soto
yes and under the old act there
was one defendants that one
defendant would be the
healthcare providers health care
provider encompass independent
doctors outpatient facilities
hospitals everyone was a health
care provider what the new act
does is is it distinguishes
between different kinds of
providers and for a very very
explicit purpose negotiated
among all four parties and that
is because a patient who goes
into an outpatient surgical
facility where they have
anesthesia they are cut into
they can have catastrophic
injuries and so we had to create
different categories we didn't
intend for any independent
providers and independent
doctors to have a higher cap
other than what was agreed upon
in terms of the bond between six
hundred and seven fifty but we
had to then separated out
independent providers outpatient
health care facilities and
hospitals and so that was very
explicitly
that the it refers to health
care providers because under
that half which was in a place
that will be in place until
January first everybody was
treated the same they no longer
are.
At.
thank you Mr okay thank you
thank you for that explanation
this large group slow with and
if you're appreciate your
expertise I'm still up is is
there any disagreement by the
experts in the panel that we
were to adopt
House Bill level as it was
amended on the floor that
outpatient facilities would
of postponed the increase in
caps for two and a half years
from where they want if we
didn't act this law.
Mr chairman and the the I agree
with you the only cabbie out
being that if a facility of was
majority owned and controlled
via hospital they would you know
the cap would would not be
delayed
but yes I agree with you other
than that I will talk a bit
about that issue too because I
brought up with someone probably
is the easy way for you know
that sounds like a great of the
things to have happened to taken
out patient facilities that are
owned by hospitals treat them a
little differently very clever
lawyers of why that is that is
great a separate entity for the
outpatient facility and so it's
no longer owned by the hospital
and so they
And so when they negotiated this
they probably thought the people
negotiating at four injured
persons probably thought that
they're treating operation
facilities by hospital
differently but hospitals are I
litigate against those guys are
really small.
And I got really great lawyers
from Tennessee on down through
the southwest and that it would
have taken them into a second
year law student a few minutes
to figure out and create a
separate LLC if you want that
right so the there there there's
ways to game this and I'm I'm
trying to what came in this but
back to my question is that we
adopt the bill as it comes over.
we take a law that now says that
we should facilities have to the
cap damages at four million
dollars.
which becomes effective what
that becomes effective June
twenty twenty three is that
right
so they would still be only at
seven fifty four this next year
twenty twenty two.
I got that right yeah I'm pretty
sure that that's correct yeah so
operation facilities as it
stands right now don't increase
their caps this year for twenty
twenty to come up there's still
only at seven fifty and they
would only go to four and a half
million in twenty twenty three
Mr Chairman one distinction it's
only for independently owned
outpatient facilities yes but
it's back to the whole hospital
over small hospital so let me
just say for the sake of my
questions I'm talking about the
average of the cities that are
not I'm a critical care quotes
on my hospital because that'll
be an issue what what phone I
becomes an entirely new issue
there too of litigation right
which is what it means the phone
by what is an outpatient
facility phone via hospital me.
We'll litigate that for a few
years I agree Mr Chairman
however we did include the
subsidiaries of hospitals within
the definition here sort of you
know there was an attempt made
to call that concern and I
appreciate that very much and as
you know how we talked about as
we come in here a little bit
we'd like to tighten that even
more right because because I
want to avoid a situation where
outpatient facility simply
avoids that by
again as I said just bring a
separate entity right and and
as that operation facilities not
home by the hospital is owned by
the same company same parent
company for again it's a becomes
of of you know parent subsidiary
relationship all that kind of
business to the it's pretty
complicated but I just want to
stay where I'm at right now the
the the right right now the the
deal that was negotiated back in
March is that outpatient
facilities would go from seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
This year in twenty twenty two
Senator the year coming up
twenty twenty two
in the twenty twenty three they
would be capped at four and a
half a million dollars but by
the what's come over my house
right now is that gets delayed
for two and a half years and and
while I appreciate very much of
the the testimony of from his
love earlier that there was good
thinking about that but we
should delay this until we can
come back in another sixty day
session to correct is that
explains why we're doing this
for two plus years of but but my
mind is that the we need some
additional time to and the and
to reconcile this we really
should do it in the next thirty
day session and and we can do
another day session on confident
we would have the breathing room
that we need and and I'm
confident the governor would
give us a message to do that let
me let me before coming Senator
let me tell you why this really
is what really troubles me about
this.
There is a lot of medical
malpractice act was passed well
as Damon or Representative Ely
for Kathy with seventy six
regional malpractice six seventy
six so we're now almost fifty
years approaching fifty years of
an act.
In the fifty years since the
medical malpractice act was
originally passed there are
dozens and dozens of cases that
we all work with everyday trying
to interpret what the
legislature met in that medical
malpractice second we have those
cases that kind of guide us as
lawyers everyday to try and
interpret the medical
malpractice act based on those
decisions.
But now we have a law that's
going to become a factor that we
just pass issue that the change
a lot of very significant
language and so now we're gonna
need a whole nobody of case law
to interpret that.
And then we're talking about
changing it again in significant
ways and we're going to have a
new body case law based on will
be on a called third generation
of the medical malpractice act
so any court try to decide what
cap supplier what definitions
applied or what act applies for
given injury or death on a given
date is going to have to
reconcile which version of the
medical malpractice staff was in
place and perhaps discount that
fifty years of case law.
defining the act in explaining
the act because that would now
have changed so the court will
have to say the legislature
intended that change
and so I really do think we're
creating.
Representative mass if we don't
try to fix this as best we can
now as opposed to saying we're
going to have one long place the
old act for the first fifty
years now we're gonna have a new
law in effect for the next two
and a half years.
With these changes and so forth
and then we're going to change
it again a plan to change it and
in two and a half years to some
other version of the act and
that was a whole new body of
case law based on that fact.
You're really.
Making life impossible for the
courts the judges and the
lawyers who practice in this
area thank
gonna get that's why again my
comments to the tri state case
instead of spending a ten years
and millions of dollars trying
to so what the legislature
intended how about we we make it
clear what we're intending to do
is here so
no bouncing around it's it's
seems maybe randomly but I I do
want to give everyone my biggest
take on this which is in my mind
this is not about the HSD issue
this is not about expecting
doctors to have four million
dollars of coverage.
We're gonna take care of that
the the better question for me
is is there a reason why
operation facilities should be
delayed from a deal they may
just earlier this year and if so
for for two and a half years and
have we established of the
outpatient facilities can't get
work those are for the coverage
that to me does not seem very
difficult.
I don't know about the rest of I
talked to Mister weeks he's here
I I told him earlier so what we
should be doing this deal is
increasing all the caps.
Two million dollars I don't know
anybody who's in business who
doesn't carry million dollars
with the coverage
you know you're gonna trucking
company you got to have a
million dollars businesses and
million dollars the the notion
that that a doctor can't get a
million dollars with the
coverage I've got a case against
the Dennis he's got a million
dollars of coverage I don't
think that's impossible I was
going to I think.
It's pretty pretty easy to get a
million dollars coverage I think
four million dollars becomes a
challenge unless we get to get
excess coverage of the insurance
and staff policies and so forth.
But
I got a proposed amendment I'm
ready for the committee to start
considering it but let's talk
more about these issues as they
of really no I want to give the
committee some introduction what
we see in the amendment and then
I before that are sort of like
him for that I want to caution
everyone so they don't have a
heart attack.
did I see role here's the still
here no.
Zero.
With a
thank you yeah this right thank
you so Pat Patman back there
yeah I see all right so let me
think Pam and Legislative
Council for what they've done
here's what they've advised me.
Which is while the house takes
up house bill seventy five it
was pass and make some changes
to house bill thirty five and
strikes really very simply
for words on the HSD issue.
What Legislative Council is
advisement we met about it some
like is you can't do that you
can't make a statutory change
those forwards to a bill that's
not yet effective and that.
And so that's what we what we've
done this proposed amendment is
essentially recreate house bill
seventy five and so it looks
like a lot it looks like a lot
of change in a lot of
intermediation sore but it's
really it's really not it's
mostly just taking your house
bill seventy five and putting
it.
And to this bill to your bill
now.
and.
I'm gonna maybe disagreement
about that issue but I relied
upon good advice which the
council that this is where we
had to do it so so before we
pass out of amendment that
everybody go direct guests and
and sees the title says
increasing the caps on damages
and there was always a sales
Abbas is trying to get of the
increased cap damages the bills
now this is just reaffirming
what was it house bill seventy
five on on the ship capsular
make let me disabuse anybody
that notion there's no intention
and and anything we're doing
here to increase caps but my
intention is not to let people
Welch out of the amendment
and on backroom outpatient
facilities are really good
reason I haven't heard one so
Representative.
Mister Rogers I just wanna make
a the way I read.
House bill seventy five in the
context of what was proposed by
the house.
This was intended by the house.
Is that and twenty twenty two.
Hospitals will be subject to
four billion dollars outpatient
health care facilities would be
subject to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
And twenty twenty three.
Hospitals are the subject to
four point five million dollars.
Operation health care facilities
would be subject to seven fifty
thousand dollars plus the
consumer price index increase
for that year.
And twenty twenty four.
Both hospitals and outpatient
health care facilities.
We'll have to have five million
dollars Mr Chairman.
What that five million dollars
of insurance at that time the
twenty twenty four.
and if I if I read that
correctly so that so that under
new rules proposed by the house.
are printed by the house as it
came out is that how patient
health care facilities.
from six hundred thousand
dollars today to seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars in
January.
Seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars plus but surprised
increase.
in general one twenty twenty
three and five million dollars
and twenty twenty four.
And so I just I just wanna make
sure that that that.
We've heard a couple of
different different different
amounts I just wanna be sure
that the people understood that
structure has a.
Representative center okay
already together would you mind
my notes and I try to make notes
as I went through as the CPI
doesn't kick in until twenty
twenty seven I believe on
hospitals and outpatient
facilities in other words I
believe right now house bill
seventy five as it was drafted
has an automatic escalator for
outpatient facilities in other
words right now it's seven
fifteen twenty twenty two it
goes to four and a half million
twenty twenty three five million
twenty twenty for five and a
half million twenty twenty five
six million in twenty twenty six
and twenty twenty seven it's six
million dollars plus the TI
I'm hoping that I my notes are
accurate with the bill but that
that's the way that I made notes
of forty one dash I dash six.
New Mexico let's see redefine
because I think you just choose
one was the CPI kicks in as
early as twenty twenty three I
think and that's not all the
feedback except for independent.
Providers and twenty twenty
three.
The pandemic but I'm talk about
outpatient facilities.
Operation facilities act so with
hospital the twenty twenty
effect.
Thank you I don't think words
all the were to concern these
are not too concerned about the
independent providers once we
take out the agency requests
my big concern is.
Operation facilities.
I'm sorry centers are used on
the floor that's alright this I
guess so so okay so that.
So that it's and twenty twenty
two budget.
Seven hundred fifty thousand and
four million twenty twenty three
seven hundred fifty thousand.
And four point five.
Twenty twenty four five million
five hundred.
That yes correct is that okay.
To make sure we all understood
that so with existing law exists
right now well the existing law
with the.
With the with the what the
hospice but folks.
Without what the house is
proposed outpatient facilities
immediately and and try try to
also go to a four million four
point five and I.
Only.
And the language that I'm
looking at is and subsection C..
Of of of that section it's four
million per occurrence for
claims brought against a
hospital for population health
care facility.
Subsection the.
Four point five million dollars
per occurrence for claims
brought against this bill for
outpatient health care
facilities.
For you yeah I under forty one
five six C. in twenty twenty two
if house bill eleven did not
exist if we're just talking
about house bill seventy five
both outpatients and hospitals
would go to four million in
twenty twenty to under forty one
five six six.
And then it would increase in
five hundred thousand dollar
increments until twenty twenty
so.
I'm sorry service so I think
that's what you said and I and I
challenge you and your other
direct.
So Representative another way.
If we were in there right now
and again I'm gonna take the
issue of the agency budget than
a providers off off the
discussion on what we're gonna
take care of the docks we're
gonna figure that out so I
wanted to say focus on the
outpatient providers and right
now operation providers or so
this is the cities are supposed
to be a cover for four million
dollars beginning in this next
year and I haven't yet heard
I've heard I've heard all
difficult maybe for individual
providers you four million
dollars and I get everything I
get that
but I haven't yet that the
facility.
And some of these are pretty
elaborate facilities there are
two different at a hospital
I'm puzzled by the suggestion
that they can't get four million
dollars a coverage
and that they need to be really
from that deal for the next two
and a half years I've I'm still
puzzled.
Senator seven to seven major
project so I think we need to
make sure we get the clarity
between outpatient healthcare
providers and then independently
owned outpatient health care
facilities because there is a
difference I specifically how
they're treated by insurance
companies as well so when we're
speaking about outpatient
facilities you know not all
independently owned outpatient
facilities are you know I'm not
outpatient facilities are
independently owned outpatient
facilities and there is a
distinction between the two so
we're not talking about
outpatient facilities and and
and general with regard to house
bill eleven we're only talking
about those independently owned
facilities that at this time
have been unable to secure an
insurance for the limits for
those.
And that the physician owned
facilities and I appreciate that
very much although that's not in
the definition of outpatient
facility rights on outpatient
care facilities anyone
independently owned.
What it does is it can be by
hospital but I tell you before
earlier that's the second your
loss with students sixty this
create the LLC and have them on
the the facility so it's not
owned by the hospital that was
precisely the the issue Mr
chairman and why we change that
definition within our house bill
eleven to make sure that
delineation was quicker.
What would your group
Representative that what you
just said because you're making
a distinction I think it's
important which is you've got
note there's operation
facilities and outpatient
facilities right and there's
some that are independently
owned by fox and then there's
some that are owned by
corporations and others ask.
I'm certain hospitals yeah but
but I'm looking at house bill
seventy five as it was passed
the defiance outpatient facility
and I'm missing something here
let's see here I don't see
anything here that the talks
about independently owned or
owned by doctors in on
it it just says operation
facility does not include
independent providers but if
it's anything opinion in there
from the house version house
bill thirty five as fast doesn't
draw the distinction you're
drawing here today that that
there's operation facilities
independently owned versus non
there are ones that other house
bill seventy five.
Thank you Mr chairman if I can
try your attention to Page four
section two one of the term
temporary provisions that's
included House Bill Evans
director going on to the next
page I starting at line two will
just read the entire line for
claims brought against an
outpatient health care
facilities not including new
language outpatient health care
facilities major major under
control by hospital which makes
the delineation where there.
In our house bill and and and
and that's what I'm here today
not to be seventy five well I
hope you'll help us work with
that language because well it's
clear to you it's not going to
be clear to a quarter to other
lawyers when you say than
outpatient facility is major
form or controlled by hospital
than the issues which control me
right and we litigate that all
day long what is what is control
do they that whether they have
to to exercise a sufficient
level of control that means
they're entirely new category of
caps right and and I if I'm
suing outpatient facility I'm
gonna argue the control whether
hospitals and I'm gonna try and
show the COVID common bylaws of
COVID privileges or what I'm
gonna do anything I can district
trying to argue that there's
control there and we're not
gonna happen after that so I I
think we can tie that up
Representative is what I'm
trying to suggest with you know
with your willingness to
consider that
and once again even your
definition says you're going to
take up this other category of
outpatient facilities that are
majority owned by hospital than
the simple dodges real simple
you the mid hospitals and all
the major hospitals forty nine
percent and some other
subsidiary or some other
corporation something they they
create owns the other fifty one
percent and you get with the
caps right and and so again
folks are pretty creative and
clever about creating entities
to weigh liability and that's
the first thing they would do is
avoid that liability by.
Not being a major which is the
definition I don't think I would
have suggested I don't know
that's a good way to to narrow
that you're sure to find out
what we come up with something
better together with you and
another to the committee Mr
chairman if I may wealth.
I understand this is written by
some I I suppose so I generally
respect tremendously
for their.
Structural understanding of
things hi I personally find this
to be particularly with that
part of our talk about right
there.
Where it introduces a new
concept altogether to be
unconstitutional I move my
reference.
I'm very wrong about that.
And and I know that I'm often
pretty bold about doing a
constitutional amendment
reference myself but.
Hi I'm not sure how how that
with square you that's concept
that's not even discussed it and
in the current medical
malpractice.
I'm sorry Sir Representative
could you could you explain to
me what you mean by the
constitutional nature of that
definition yes so so so the
thing is that what they're what
they're doing to separate
provision.
Which normally separate
provision isn't printed.
But.
I don't know how you get around
not printing this one compiling
it.
Is that
Is that they're introducing a
new concept that's not even
discussed enough and the medical
malpractice act.
About and this health care
facility.
majority owned or controlled
hospital.
And then apply a different
standard for them of not
exceeding seven or fifty
thousand dollars even up what
otherwise would otherwise be
different amount.
They're not going and and and
amending the.
The law itself they're just
saying when you read the law
read the law different for what
the law says.
and and so that's that's where I
see it to be a that and aposs to
summon by reference.
And again I I I I could be wrong
about that but I that's why.
That's my initial
take on.
And I'm open to other people's
thoughts on that issue but.
Because basically we've now
created.
And and section.
Forty one dash five dash three.
There's a definition of
operation.
Okay facility.
And subsection J..
And then there's affected Lee
then a separate definition about
operation health care facility.
Which is the operation of the
facility not.
that is.
That is.
Major under control by hospital.
Even without patient health care
facility but you never see that
in the of that nature and.
Forty one dash five dash three
because that's the definition
that it reverberates throughout
the whole left.
If I may respond Mr chairman
Senator Ivy Soto I I definitely
recognize and acknowledge the
issues you're presenting at
although I guess I'm I must
disagree that it's a
definitional issue and that
there is just simply a plain
language meaning it may not be a
perfect fix at this moment but
we're just making that
delineation in plain language so
is so is to make sure that we're
applying the standard we meant
to apply to these particularly
independent physician owned
outpatient facilities.
Right but but but would you not
agree with me that that that we
actively than have.
Until July one twenty twenty
four we effectively have two
different definitions of
operation health care for so.
Chairman Cervantes and and
Senator Ivey Soto
I think that can be one argument
but I think it's also important
to examine this within the
context of the that brings us
here today and that we are not
here to re litigate the medical
malpractice up we're here to put
together a fix within the time
we have a lot it that all the
parties and stakeholders have
agreed to can't agree to and can
move forward with so that we can
continue to identify these
particular issues and correct
them as time will require
however we don't have this time
now this sixteen days and so we
tried to crack narrowly craft a
solution that we know could pass
muster in this particular
context so that we don't end up
tripping over our own feet so to
speak so you know that all of
these issues may exist could
exist but right now our number
one problem it is to fix the
number one issue in front of us
right now which is we have to
make sure these folks can get
insurance January one.
Mr chairman and Representative
right I agree with you on that.
But it doesn't help them with
insurance if if the.
If we are if we are creating a
definition that doesn't exist of
all.
In a way that doesn't conform
with the constitution.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto I I think we can agree to
disagree on that issue for now
would love to if you are in fact
correct that is that is an issue
that we cannot ignore we can
continue to refer to the
drafters from Legislative
Council I think there might be a
difference of opinion on that
but it's that it's something we
if we need to take care of it we
absolutely must and will.
Yeah and and and if I'm wrong is
no big deal.
If you're wrong I think it into
the clerk's office.
Thank you Mr thank you Senator
Baca chair Mister chair is
really on the on the point two
for a Senator Ivey Soto is
covering and heard him Senator
about this I attended disagree
Mr chair about that definition
we always change definitions
here we have an outpatient
health care facility and then in
section two we delineate a
certain type of outpatient
health care facility Amy to make
a simple example we have of the
to use a of an example us
talking about with with the
Senator Pirtle here will go we
have a dog and they're just say
not including yellow dogs it's
not really that difficult of a
concept so I I don't understand
how judge certainly can parse
that out we're talking about
outpatient health care facility
except in these instances we're
talking about majority owned and
controlled by hospital I I just
don't see where the difficulty
that concept is and where we're
introducing a term that is not
seen in lobby for on the one
hand here we're looking at this
definition but we can go
separately to the item that was
brought up earlier in occurrence
where we're defining put in
occurrences has that occurrence
ever been defined in lost
somewhere else no well we're
gonna expect to that the judges
would define what in occurrences
and even in the new definition
of the current if we look at
that.
It says Law.
Really the the the prime
language in their separate
indivisible injury to a patient
now when do we stop that you
know I mean I guess there could
be endless chain of injuries
resulting from one injury to
another I of the sponge gets
left inside of me Mr chair and
then we go in and remove this
sponge and I have a laceration
but well of undergoing rehab
like happen to be in the rehab
facility and slip in her long
for my knee and now I have the
injury and on and on and on and
so we're really just setting
different barriers within the
staff conditions occurrence
outpatient health care
facilities and in the end it
will be developed decided by a
judge somewhere litigation the
other point I'd like to make I
didn't completely disagree with
earlier or that I did disagree
with earlier a to a certain
extent was that it gets
confusing if we have one body of
law in the medical malpractice
act it's fifty years old and
then we come up with a new
segment a lot of two and a half
years it's this certain away and
then the next fifty it's the
third iteration if you will of
the medical malpractice act I
think the judges and litigation
attorneys are smart enough to
look up of date of fall and go
into the statutes and look up
what statute applied and then
determine for the case lawyers
for that that again is not very
difficult and so I just don't
see of the hello logic follows
in those three cases and so I I
just thought I would point that
out I think some of these we get
in the weeds a little bit into
the technicalities of of
litigation and that sort of
thing
we write these laws all the time
Mr chair with rate of just like
this and we forced judges to
position for the after the
determination to for.
And that's their job thank you
Mr.
I agree completely with center
back up this if there is a place
for the best read.
Senator provision.
The
Expectation is then that is not
going to be compiled.
If it's a if it's a compile
provision I don't I don't have
nearly as much R. Peroni.
I think I think which is what
you said absolutely would hold.
I do have I do have one other
question and I know that you
guys don't with this foreign to
apologize for asking the
question it but
if if coverages for calendar
year.
Why is it that the temper
provision ends on July one.
Of twenty twenty three.
New Mexico I know I know I know
you explain this but I'm just
now twenty in on that issue.
This is to me like you're
getting coverage for the
calories.
And and because you're talking
current currents which means.
To be preferences you think
during the during the covered
year which equals the calendar
year.
Chairman serve on disincentive
regards sent to the intent of
that was to give everyone that
this next upcoming year
time to figure out what the
insurance issues are.
So that if need be this can be
dealt with in the sixty day
session the expectation is that
we will deal with the insurance
issues and insurance companies
will know that they have until
the middle of the year to cover
up to seven fifty and then for
currents is that happen after
that think of the higher cap and
insurance companies do this all
the time with detailed coverage
and and different beginning
dates of of you buy a car in the
middle of the year and and they
can figure out how to how to
address that and and issue
policies so the intent then is
in fact of Mr chairman miss
love.
the tent is that the that the
the cap.
Increase in the middle of the
coverage yes if you're getting
out procedure done in twenty
twenty three you should do it
after July one.
Of the year.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
chairman go back to Senator Ivey
Soto for the twentieth time
Remember your question now I
want to go back to this car
comments about the the majority
owned and controlled by the
hospital definition Mr chair
they fall completely as a non
lawyer on this committee follow
you because I see that the
definition that you guys were
talking about is also in your
very own amendment
so why does it not work in the
actual house house bill get the
exact same verbiage is in the
amendment to of those working
doesn't work.
So for the look out definition
of outpatient facility
then what we did is we took the
reference there is to agree on
but by hospital.
Of.
Definitional hospital.
We reviewed so.
Include the current if you look
at the definition hospital the
hospital company subsidiary
holding company affiliate.
The corporate with the
registration state so that
that's how we try to address
that
the question Senator but but
also agree with you know we may
we may need to define that
outpatient facility even better
than I propose an amendment.
On the first graph sending them
as a place to start.
This committee is to improve on
my work with us before.
Your question there but maybe
but I wanted to.
that might be appropriate now
want to get to move on one side
but it's a little bit later your
definition independent provider
doing discuss that now we're
doing to get to that later
because we our our personal
conversations about been
approved providers and try and
make sure that they're taken
care of this definition is
confusing to me.
yes Representative Mr chair or
do I go back to it later.
on more than one to yield and
and I think this is the floor
that we're doing okay let me
just interrupt Department
Germantown I've been fast enough
for the president of the Senate
pro tem that that we've been
given all beneficial time to
eight o'clock tonight so
Working time and I think that's
good for most of us on the
committee I see some people Mr
is not a has affirmatively I see
some on the rise just kind of
blazing over a rolling back of
her head but but are we have
some time to work and we should
do that work because I know we
want to have this done right.
Mister chairman Senator
go for if you want to talk about
the definition of independent
providers thank thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam pro
seven maybe we need your
expertise to send structures on
this one if you look on on page
two and looking under the
independent provider means a
health care provider who is not
an employee of the board
independent contractor of with
those comments is there a
hospital bubbled Law summary now
that's confusing us talk to me
in a bit of a wider means a
health care provider who is not
for the next clause an
independent contractor for if
you look at that some structure
some of the better provider
means a health care provider who
is not an independent contractor
for.
That approach
Does that that structure is just
the the it's it's so the work.
Representative at a provider is
not an independent contractor.
Senator Sanchez I'm I'm so sorry
but just for my own
clarification on what we're
talking about language in the
amendment that has the amendment
are we on the amendment now or.
Us and we're not move the
amendment but you can see we're
talking about the movie and I I
would just propose we can do to
maybe let that flow happen
because that may help explain
why the moment is going to go
anywhere thank you and a final
coming in here there's someone
feel very strongly that there
should be no amendments of all
those things all perfectly done
the way it is so I think the
free flow is good for now
senator or representative but
that you have the right the
amendment is not yet been moved
but I think it's gonna something
talk about thank you turned up
was a little so Senator Moores
I'm sorry you were asking me a
question about this Mr yes I was
just so the waiver in the sense
of that clause is in a better
provider means a health care
provider who is not.
An independent contractor for.
Hospital operations center the
audio to.
So Senator and this were as love
can probably help more help us
of what happens oftentimes.
When you when you litigate these
cases hospitals often times have
like if you go to the mercy
Department the doctors and
emergency department are
probably not employees of the
hospital in many cases their
employees are recorded on the
that that any of the program.
on on by a corporation is owned
by a corporation you know
there's a that's the way this
deal works
but but that was that that was
the purpose of of my redefining
independent provider because
again let's be clear.
Independent providers is the one
who's getting the lowest caps on
damages throughout the revisions
house bill seventy five
independent provider never has a
liability greater than seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
plus CPI right so so being an
independent providers the place
to be when it comes down to the
lowest caps of course
and what I'm trying to do is
avoid a situation where somebody
uses that qualification to to
avoid those those local hires
capsule so the definition here
intended was a health care
provider is not an employee of
the hospital work for an
independent contractor the
hospital the controllers that
they what all what'll happen is
the hospitals will sign a
contract with a doctor the
contract says you're not an
employee of the hospital you're
an independent contractor the
hospital the table top legally
they're not an employee of the
hospital because they got a
contract that says are not
employees.
This issue gets litigated all
day long these days with uber I
was following up my good friend
down weeks because him and I
spent the two apartments trying
to write that we were left the
right sure bill which I don't
know if he's ever been amended
or proposed to create problems
with that's the issue not to get
too far off the mark but that's
the issue with some of those
guys is is though some people
plan their employees of the
company is and and the company
most of the independent
contractors so the company not
liable for them really what it
boils down to the appreciate
your still that's and so that
makes sense for instance in our
and of the faulty consultants
we're independent contractor for
nine different hospitals.
in your in this in the way the
structure is is that independent
provider read read that PC and
N. M. P. C. N. M. is not and in
fact a contractor so I hope you
see when you substitute those
words that that it doesn't make
sense and so those nine
hospitals some corporations some
community health of X. come some
community owned
someone by the county some of
our corporations but those nine
hospitals under your definition
means that the a small a
laboratory like ours would not
be included so I'm I'm I'm very
concerned about that.
I thank you.
And we're.
I have.
Is a different matter more.
Your.
I.
If we're going to.
There is.
I.
Where.
And licensing department also
thank you my Mike was not on.
I'm sorry your proposing that
after a public health act we
strictly what again including
that or by the regulation and
licensing department.
And then also adding language
which I think would make sense
maybe after urgent care clinics
possessed freestanding emergency
room.
Because I think that is the
language that are.
That that the RLD license folks.
We would be more specific about
is that my understanding is
correct.
I'm I don't know if I should the
operating is as awful moments to
the amendment this point or just
kind of walking through my bank
and but but one other change
that I I think would be good.
To the cement industry share is
in the definition of hospital
there some language that's in
the original HB seventy five
that is not included here that I
I think should be specifically
language about by the employee's
name and and listen tenants
operas provided services at the
hospital HSD versus providing
services and hospital.
I don't know if at this point
Senator we're doing this free
flowing right right or if your
complete with your comments and
like to go to senator Morris for
thank you senator more.
Senator to accept Mr why we were
missed not going to them to
answer get their questions.
Or their feedback on my question
about it about a provider for
conversations between us and we
did not go to the lawyers from
the American society or the
trial attorneys.
Thank you.
Mr chairman Senator Moores yet
we have the same concern
regarding the or independent
contractor for language I think
it leaves us close to where we
were with the agency language
you know I think you know anyone
who's seen in a hospital you're
going to come in contact with an
independent provider and it's
those independent providers who
can not access insurance of the
higher cap and also I I think
it's worth it it's worth noting
that that in the under this
definition independent
contractors are excluded from
the definition of independent
providers but they are included
in any other definition so
arguably there would not be any
cat for an independent provider
under this of.
And and maybe that's me being
hyper technical but.
It could be a conservatives love
a good idea for you.
You've got I'm cap the providers
of these me I've got a deal
together.
Of early.
It's a good point about
canceling of I can Mr with and
so I hope you'll think about
this and and you maybe give us
some suggestions to work on it
but
I'm I'm gonna give you the
scenario that I'm used to and
again this love has the
experience I'm sure would many
of us do is you're going to
merge Department the drive in
numbers part is not an employee
of the hospital right so so by
this definition they would they
would be an independent provider
well this letter saying no but
indicated provided means a
health care provider was not an
employee of the hospital for
occupation facilities so that
emergency room position would
not be an employee of a hospital
and would not be an employment
operation facilities so they
would be an independent
provider.
Thank you chairman serve on this
and Senator ideal it here's how
I look like to explain what is
intended is that an independent
provider can it is always going
to have the seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar tax support cap
on them no matter what they do
whether they're working in their
own clinic or whether they go
into the hospital privileges
privileges to perform the
surgery now a hospital may be
liable for the acts of the
doctors that they invite to come
into their facility and perform
surgeries by agency law and that
is what was intended by this
bill the independent provider
walks around with the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollar
cap at all times the hospital
has the four million dollar cap
and can also be responsible
under agency theory which is not
built into this should not be
built into this act
Because it's based on case law
and so the concern with now
adding into this an exception
for independent providers is
that we go right back to those
four words that we're trying to
remove from the definition we
want individual doctors who are
independent providers to be able
to we're that seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollar cap hats
wherever they go and if we add
the independent provider
language that will remove that
from the act and and expose them
again to the problem that we
have with getting coverage for
doctors who may be subject to a
four million dollar cap even
when they're working in their
clinics so that that's why we
did not we we don't.
Like that language.
Mr chairman and so I I hope ms
Levin you and others in the
smart people in the room will
help me at least point out that
somehow that I'm giving you the
emergency room talking to and
how do we language that how do
we how do we define an
independent provider.
Would only be subject to the
seven hundred fifty thousand are
cap if that emergency room
physician is an employee of a
emergency services corporation
which is I think you and I agree
that's the way it's usually
structured is not your
experience will Senator services
if you take a look at the at H.
B. seventy five eight there I
like to look at it as different
buckets we have
independent doctors who are in
one bucket there in the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollar
cap bucket then we've got
employed physicians who don't
any longer have to participate
in the medical malpractice act
because they fall under the
rubric of the hospitals and then
we've got hospitals because the
definition of a hospital
includes all of their employees
so everybody who works for a
hospital is now under the
hospital four million dollar cap
and I'm saying four million
dollars recognizing that it goes
up every year five five hundred
thousand dollars until we reach
the six million dollar cap.
So those doctors in the employee
to physician.
Packets are covered under the
hospitals it's the independent
providers who are not employed
by the hospitals that are
project trying to protect with
the lower cap.
What what this by Senator probe
you wanted to.
More
you Mr chairman I think this is
more on that on that point so
I think the concern I have it in
excluding or even the need to
put an independent contractor
is.
You know you look at the
definition of of what
independent contractor is you
know say with with regard to the
IRS you can't be an independent
contractor if you're under the
direction of an entity so if the
hospital is directing this
doctors that you show up at six
AM and you go home at six PM
then they're no longer
independent because they're
under the the direction.
And so I I think that kind of
money is it is well there's
probably a way that we can work
through that
but if somebody's truly
independent and they're not in
that that at the direction of
the facility they just have
privileges or something along
that line it's it's a little
different so that was just the
point that that I wanted to make
with regard to to independent
contractor thank you.
Mr chairman of I can just a note
of course that we were for
benefit we have James and ran it
back for all my friends to make
a really good notes and
observations everything so for
example when Senator had a
suggestion for president and
adding some additional language
one of these definitions of hope
we're making notes of that we're
going to come back in and maybe
do a better job of the amendment
that I threw out for discussion
purposes Mr chairman that's it's
a starting place of you're right
this is a little free flowing up
hi I'm smiling under my mask.
Trust me
because of course the suggestion
for about a half hour debate on
the Senate floor there's we
should do this on the Senate
floor we didn't need to do
Judiciary Committee we should a
blast of this bill that
suggestion came not only from so
my Senate colleagues but also
from others in this capitol
building that that the decision
to come right down to the floor
because it was really simple and
the we could do all of this as a
Senate floor so presented may I
just I I just I'm I'm smiling a
lot more their observations.
Some.
And then.
Well and.
And and that's fair center I
guess the question is who is is
that any amendment I think the
suggestion was no amendments are
needed to the bill and that'll
be the pleasure of the committee
committee committee that house
bill eleven of the comes over is
perfectly fine and all of I
don't think I'll surprise
anybody that you disagree but
but we'll take that but when the
time comes.
Some.
Thank you Mr chairman I do have
a couple quick questions and go
forgive me.
After the basic question at the
beginning I.
What is locations on this.
This class.
That's delimitations has not
changed I don't what is it two
years.
Three or three are three years I
was got confused with the tort
claims act cap it's to your it's
three years under the medical
malpractice act some of the more
that's the holders of the whole
law school class because.
That I just failed but if you're
qualified participants qualify
providers on the medical
malpractice act it's not a
statue limitations of stature
repose right right so there's an
incentive for doctors become
qualified in the health care
under the on the because medical
providers healthcare providers
the act because of so then
they're entitled to US secretary
propose which means the time for
filing the claim is not
dependent on when it's
discovered it's it's a hard and
fast deadline if you're not a
qualified health care provider
and if you don't have come under
the act then it is a discovery
based statue limitations and so
it's kinda like when you knew or
should have known the cause of
action arose of what I'm trying
to suggest is your question has
a very complicated answer
there's a lot of litigation over
that issue and and and so the
reason why I ask that.
Is because.
I'm trying to figure out and
this goes back to your point
this gentleman about which
version of the medical
malpractice claims act were
talking about.
But also as as lot of about the
house.
With the temporary provision
which probably isn't compiled.
If it that's number provisions
and is.
It's not operative just until
twenty twenty three that's
operative until the expiration
of.
Of the staff limitations.
That would be implicated by any
the for staff to repose.
That would be implicated by
anything that happened up until
July one twenty twenty three.
Which means that could be so
that separates could be
implicated for an additional
several years at least.
I will go to you know how many
right yeah right okay and
at least three more years and
and then potentially.
More and in so many ways
It does it does seem to be the
Mr chairman as I read the.
It does seem to me that Mr
chairman as I as I as I read the
through the definition is here.
That the definition of hospital.
Mr Chairman.
That's the definition of a
hospital
Probably and here we want the
definition of hospital.
I'll wait.
Representative.
Yes okay thank you for that so
it doesn't with the definition
of hospital that we have in the
amendment.
Probably there should be
Hospital includes Hey and then a
number one.
Hospitals parent company
subsidiary of the company are
Philly at the corporate with the
Russian agent in New Mexico and.
To.
An operation health care
facility.
That is majority owned or
controlled by a hospital.
Because otherwise it seems to be
that
hospital majority owned health
care facility.
Our hospital controlled medical
of of profitability has no cap.
Under this the way that it's
written.
That's what I mentioned was
lower.
Terms are going to send Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto I think that
your concern is addressed under
the definition of a hospital and
that the definition of a
hospital includes outpatient
health care facilities that are
majority owned by hospitals
because the definition of a
hospital includes all of its
subsidiaries and incorporations
and so
And affiliates isn't even just
affiliates if input is
incorporated and registered in
New Mexico right so.
But the thing is Mr chairman
miss love.
It is so you make a you make a
change.
The hospital we start off with
hospital with the facility
license as a hospital.
And then down below choose.
Then then under.
It includes you go to.
You go to incorporation status.
And and so the thing is is that
at an outpatient health care
facility built is a licensed
facility.
And so I don't I don't know that
it that that that the license
facility is equal to.
And incorporation status that is
discussed at the end of that
definition.
Chairman and senator Ivey Soto I
think the answer is that it
doesn't matter because the
definition of hospital in
compasses any outpatient
facility that the hospital.
And again what is that I see
impatient license is also in the
state that offers inpatient
services.
Where's the operation and that
it doesn't say it it refers to.
Any parent corporation
subsidiary corporation or its
affiliates again that's a
business entity yes.
And so you start with the
definition that deals with what
your license to do.
And then you go down to talk
about business organization stat
I statuses that I.
Yeah and and so you're mixing
your metaphors here.
And and what happens for the
hospital under control I
patient their license for
outpatient.
If I'm if I'm someone whose
license for operations I'm gonna
say no it it it refers to.
To corporate structure within
the context of a facility
licensed to offer inpatient
service.
Chairman and senator I so to if
you'll indulge me for a minute I
think it's important to take a
step back and take a look at
what the purpose of this was and
that is that during these
negotiations in order to save
what is really a couple of
handfuls of outpatient surgical
centers from closing their doors
on January first the intent was
to give them a buffer so that
they can get their insurance but
without giving the buffer to the
hospital no outpatient
facilities that we know can get
coverage let me just say that.
Well I think that's what the
language says with all due
respect I think that I mean what
the way I read it is that an
outpatient facility that is
independent the phone gets the
benefit of this way so that we
can sort out the insurance
issues of the outpatient
facilities that are majority
owned and controlled by
hospitals they don't get that
benefit they still have the four
million dollar cap that's the
purpose of that language in that
in in HB eleven AM this
gentleman was low.
Or there is no cap.
I at.
Chairman Senator Ivey Soto I'm
not sure I follow what you mean
by there is no cap for whom.
Hospital owned outpatient
healthcare.
Well the the hospital.
Could you give an overview of
the strong yes about that Mr
chair Senator Ivey said I think
if I understand the question I
think that that hospital owned
outpatient health care facility
would still fall under the
definition of outpatient the
standalone definition of
outpatient health care
facilities right except it's
exclude.
Firstly.
Okay I I understand yeah I
understand your point
Understood okay so yeah you're
saying it's not captured by the
the definition of hospital and
is excluded from the definition
of outpatient and therefore an
argument could be made that it
is not subject to a cap I'm just
saying you should close the loop
if that's what you intended it
seems easy enough to close the
loop.
And that this is part of one.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chair and I think.
I think a term that that might
help there is is one that's also
used with the not the iris code
that's commonly controlled
entity that you could use to tie
them together that if they are
trying to somehow circumvent or
get around that that way they
they couldn't do exactly what
has been expressed so I think
that's another term that we can
take from the iris code that
that would alleviate that that
car or you can use what is
excluded in J..
And included in the.
Because if you take what's
excluded in J. and choose
includes in the then we know
we're at fault.
Mr Chairman
Is doing Senator doing thank you
Mr.
What's happening here is we're
confusing changes made to the
temporary provision with an
intense in the moment language.
All.
It.
I mean because this was this was
intended just said to get to
this extension for these folks
this language about the majority
owned or controlled should be in
the permanent language at all if
it is that we are creating a new
cap situation but if we leave
that out of the permanent
permanent language or not it's
just.
It it it's just the temporary
right
correct but not in it this there
is no different provision the
amount.
That's right now I think I think
that at this moment that we're
looking at we we would create
the no cap situation and it
showed and said if we are going
to end somewhere address the
temporary issue for those folks
that it should be different like
it is an H. B. a lot of I.
And it would be easy enough to
say.
For example
under the definition of.
Operation health care facility
where it says but does not
include.
Operational care facilities the
majority or control by hospital.
We could just say there.
But.
Until July one twenty twenty
four twenty four through
whatever to impact does not
include.
And then in the hospital state
until the same date does
include.
Mr chair Senator I I don't even
know that we would need to have
the.
The hospital I think you're
right that would be an easy way
to address that.
That.
Make sure that the temporary
nature of that language and how
fair.
Health care outpatient health
care facility to meet creating
this right then Mr Chairman said
what would the captain be until
July one of whatever here.
For a hospital
owned additional differences.
And Mr chair Senator at.
I would defer to the experts to
answer that yeah Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Duhigg
are the intention is for those
hospital owned outpatient health
care facilities to continue to
track the the forty five one six
language you know so they will
still have the applicable caps
that are applicable to
outpatient health care
facilities it's just that we're
carving out the independently
owned outpatient health care
facilities from those caps.
But but I I do understand
Senator Ivy Soto what you're
saying now and I agree with you
the under the amendments there
would be a good argument to be
made that they are uncapped
hospital phoned outpatient
health care facilities.
so yeah I I'm sorry was a
tracking with you but I am now
and I agree the.
And I'm sorry.
As of this was answered already
and and I missed it but but
there is comment that chairs
around us had made earlier
about.
That we're hearing but that the
individual providers are are
having are not able to get the
coverage.
But is it this is the is it I
want to one situation with
these.
Providers of that is the HSD
issue seems to be a separate one
from this one so what what is
the insurance issues specific to
to these applications Mr chair
Senator Duhigg yes of the
outpatient health care
facilities that are not possible
and also cannot provide coverage
for the for.
you know for example we heard
from southwest gastro on this
afternoon I know that their
insurance broker consulted with
over twenty five different
insurers and was unable to find
anyone to write a four million
dollar policy so it's not just
the agents who can provide the
coverage it's also the
outpatient health care
facilities that are
independently cannot.
Share story I think action that.
And Mr chairman what we're
asking about people B. or may
not have a cap.
And.
This is not my area is given
from us.
Rural retreat question but.
What we do with and okay so
independent providers.
In a minute contractors are.
Our innovative providers that Mr
chairman and madam is that
correct.
Mr chair.
Mr under the amendment Senator
Ivey Soto under the amendment
the way I read it is that
independent contractors would
not be independent providers as
of right.
Independent contractors would be
excluded from the definition of
independent providers so that
what would the Cappy for
augmented contracting I don't
think under the under this
amendment there would be no cap
for independent provider because
are excluded from the definition
of independent provider.
Independent contractor is in
they are not place under any
other cat so there would be a
good argument to be made that
there is no capital flexible to
the.
And.
And assuming that's not an
argument we want to have
prevailed in court.
What should the cap before and a
contractor.
Mr Chairman Senator Ivey Soto
the entire I I idea that that
really behind HB eleven is to.
Just exclude hospital employees
from the definition of
independent provider so everyone
else any other healthcare
provider would fall under the
definition of independent
provider but if for example
there's someone who's providing
an independent provider who's on
call in any are and they are
providing services in the are.
As these cases are litigated
that individual very well might
be calm and be deemed to be an
agent and at that point that
agent will be under the hospital
cap under HSD fury
so that's a that's how we've
decided to address that issue I
walked through the employees Mr
Chairman and Mr so.
It HB eleven we've decided to
take those four words out
regarding agent right and.
The issue that's created there's
agents can't provide insurance
policies by in the amendments
were looking at today by
including you know by or
excluding independent
contractors from the definition
of independent providers those
independent contractors will be
arguably under no cap or a four
million dollar cap which is the
problem so it's our proposal to
just exclude hospital employees
from the definite definition of
independent provider so they'll
be able subject to the higher
cap in every other independent
provider will be subject to the
seven fifty cap.
Under.
This gentleman and major under
HB a lot of under age eleven.
What about under the amendment.
The amendment any any.
provider who is deemed to be an
independent contractor would be
subject to the higher cap or no
cap at all under the amendment
as Representative.
Okay.
There's some noise Senator
Moores.
I keep it down you do have in
our time.
Yeah.
Disruptive force.
So thank you so.
Yes Senator Baca.
Just real quick the one of the
issues I had city touched on HSD
in society Census Persall this
of course is not an agent of
but.
Just removing those words
there's there's constructivist
you were for by you just use the
elements of the agency which is
control and surveillance
principle the ages and consent
by the principal the agent
action of the agent on behalf of
the principal so just review
removing those words doesn't
seem to necessarily take away
the concept of agencies agency
can be produced through legal
theory and actions by the
principal in the agent and so
why does that accomplish the
removal of that agency Mr chair
Senator Baca we are trying to to
touch the common law of agency
and what we're doing here it
will still apply
so if someone is deemed to be an
agent of a hospital arguably the
hospital is on the hook for any
damages that are at issue the
reason why we've addressed and
and taken out that the agency
language in the definition of
independent provider is because
as long as that language exists
insurers are not willing to
insure any independent provider
who could be deemed an agent
because if they were deemed an
agent there wouldn't be an
independent provider they be
under the four million dollar
cap so by taking that language
out we're telling insurers an
independent providers that yes
if you're an independent
provider but providing services
in a hospital you'll be at the
lower cap you can carry a seven
fifty policy and not risk being
under insured but you know if
the case is litigated and it's
being that that independent
providers in fact and agent of
the hospital
they'll still have the seven
fifty cap at the hospital of
course will be on the hook for
the four million dollar cap for
that agent's actions.
So you're saying Mr chair saying
that the agent I'll call it the
the constructed aged to
litigations actually still
protected to the seven hundred
fifty thousand dollar cap
regardless of whether an agency
is established between the
hospital.
And that person okay Mr chair
right precisely
Okay so so second question so
much smaller back to the
definition of a hospital it's a
small issue but it's in both the
amendment and H. P. eleven
when it defines the hospital
uses in the last little
segment of the set first
sentence and may offer emergency
services I just don't see any
use for that portion of of
language in there it seems like
it could be stricken in in
either of the instances of
somebody else wants to chime in
on the on it they can but what
is and may include emergency
services either add or take away
from that definition.
is it can be found on page two
of HB eleven online.
Fourteen of sixteen.
Can be found on the proposed
amendment on page two section.
Last four or five words of the
first sentence of and what are
you yes.
You know it's just a suggestion
to whoever's drafting either
either HB eleven or for the
proposed amendment I just don't
see that that that free serves
any useful purpose and
definition of all school.
The phrases that may offer
emergency services.
Any response.
That.
Well chairman in Senator Baca I
I think that at the time the the
the the reason why that needs to
be included in there is because.
It encompasses the definition is
intended to encompass really
everything that was intended to
be a hospital and not all
hospitals offer emergency
services and there are some
standalone hospitals that are
standalone emergency rooms and
it was intended to encompass all
of those introduce.
So why would we use Mr chair
emergency room.
For an injury I suppose which is
already listed there.
You know I don't have an answer
for how why why not to do that I
think that the reason to
including emergency services as
that that's part of what was
intended with the definition of
a hospital it was intended to
encompass
the wide range of services where
patients can really be
catastrophically injured.
Belabor it but then it starts
should say shell or the whole
sentence should be out to be
honest with you Mr chair.
I'll leave it the.
Are we in for we proceed perhaps
with production of an amendment.
we we've not interested.
Are formally brainstorm that
like partners and three four.
Well I appreciate you bringing
your poetic prowess to the
legislative process free flowing
with my chin.
Right I do I I am a little
concerned that that I don't want
them the floor to be pushed back
to eleven o'clock tonight.
and so Mister chairman I've I'd
like to biggest couple
suggestions on the on house bill
eleven actually.
And and the minutes I'd like to
what I'd like to suggest on
house bill eleven.
And then we started to look at
the moment we can but it be on
page one.
Line seventeen and eighteen.
Strike.
From the word section.
Until the close of the
parentheses after as amended.
And insert in lieu thereof lost
twenty twenty one chapter
sixteen section one.
Lost twenty twenty one.
Chapter sixteen section one.
Which would then that which is
to go into effect January one
twenty twenty two.
Then.
The next thing would be.
For.
Line nineteen.
Strike the words temporary
provision.
And insert in lieu thereof.
Bracket new material close
bracket.
on.
Also on line twenty.
Where the work in front of the
work from.
Answered Hey the Notre for
subsection Hey.
What senator subsection and make
it a subsection a beginning of
from so capital letter a period.
I.
Line nine.
Strike section three
applicability.
And instead answered I did not
for subsection B..
Then strike lost twenty twenty
one chapter sixteen section
three.
And insert in lieu thereof forty
one dash I dash six.
And on line eleven.
Strike section two of this act.
And insert.
Subsection a of this section.
Finally between lines on page
five between eight twelve and
thirteen.
And Sir section three.
Affective date.
The effective date of the
provisions.
Of this act is generally one
twenty twenty two.
What that would result in to
the.
Rate in consternation of the
bill drafters is
Is we would be amending.
The chapter law that is not yet
gone into effect.
That we're going to fact general
one twenty twenty three and the
definitions to strike we're not
an agent.
It would then.
Make section to which.
Isn't there just until twenty
twenty three it is there and
taught least twenty twenty six.
And maybe longer depending upon
how long it might be applicable.
It it gets a compiled.
And then your applicability is
built into it and subsection B.
of that sections of the
applicability gets compiled as
well.
So that it's so because what
you're really saying
applicability.
With the now compiled section
two is.
Is the provisions of forty one
dash I dash six applaud the
outpatient health care
facilities as described in
subsection of this section.
Right many but enough that
affected date of general what.
FY twenty two.
But you also.
In order to get have an
effective date of less than
ninety days you need the same
boat as an emergency clause.
And and it is the preference of
let's councils also have an
emergency clause in there so
there's no question about that.
At this point can we recognize
role.
Wants to speak on this go back
to center.
Mr Burciaga you're not here in
favor or against anything or do
you think it's a good idea
you're simply here to provide
technical assistance please.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you for
reading my disclaimer.
The substance of the tax that
you are amending I think it's
completely up to the committee
however.
Right section twenty one fifty
three B. twenty seven six
chapter two section is amended.
Should not be changed because
you're still talking about forty
one five three.
That was amended as it says here
as amended that needs to state
that that is that is telling the
reader that is telling the court
that stem any attorney it's this
section has been amended
subsequently and it was amended
in January of or in this twenty
twenty one session that should
stay in there you're gonna have
if you haven't been effective
date later that will cover this
because you read out the section
cool so I would ask you to
strike anything in that
introductory one seventeen and
eighteen that would be that as
it is the same thing with the
applicability clause in.
Three.
lines line twelve that should
remain lost twenty twenty one
these are laws they just simply
haven't been compiled because
the fact that the house of that
many of that actually happened
file but if you look at NMSA
right so Mr Burciaga with regard
to the secretary when the.
The effective date this will be
compiled.
Okay so upon the effective date
this will affect referred to
forty one dash I dash six as it
exists on Jerry one twenty
twenty.
As it exists.
Why it changed the.
Forty one five six.
Because we're talking about
forty one five six.
So that way the reader knows.
It's forty one five six because
otherwise the reader.
We'll have to go the secretary
of state's office.
They noted the look there to
provide the chapter law to find
out that that chapter.
Last one chapter sixteen section
thirteen refers to forty one
dash I dash six says it refers
to forty one that I just X. as
effective January one twenty
twenty two and the effective
date of this is generally one
twenty twenty two.
Then the reader will know when
they read it after general one
twenty tried to.
That that is what is referred
to.
Mr Chairman etcetera etcetera
etcetera.
The reader does not have to go
to the secretary of state's
office they just need to pick up
the lost twenty twenty one to
provide their work online on one
source and is there.
Have you tried to look it up
through the chapter version
there because of some royal pain
in the **** I'll just tell you
that.
Representative from looking at
this right yeah I understand
that you guys live in that and
we're talking about people who
are practitioners.
And if what we're referring to
is forty one dash I dash six.
And.
Which is what I will refer to
one general one twenty twenty
two.
It is that we were dealing with
them forty one that I have sex
as a general what which which
which is.
Mr Chairman etcetera then then I
would argue if you want to call
out for them five six and I
would say Senate out in full and
then that that would.
The way the way it's provided
for the temporary provision.
By setting it up and so then
there's no actually no question
and it's there.
But the problem is to to do that
would require them.
Setting out forty one dash I
dash six.
effectively twice in in in this
act we would have it what's
effective January one twenty
twenty two we have another one
effective.
in twenty twenty up for.
Version of it and with that so
with that set up twice.
And and then the other thing is.
While that well the first
sentence of it is relatively
straightforward.
The the aggregate dollar amount
the the the second sentence and
terms of loss of consortium
claims.
Well I guess that's okay that's
in that that's on that that's in
those sections but basically
what we have to do that is set
up thirty one dash I dash six.
And and subsection C. strike or
operation health care facility.
Once you have the ability to do
it that way and just steps up
the whole thing out.
As it does include the last
consortium plans
stuff.
I mean if if that would be a.
Clearly for you guys for us to
do that.
Okay and so instead of that
temporary provision.
Subsection two of the politics
section to.
Then what we would do is drop
in.
Forty one dash I dash six.
In subsection C. that that
refers to your twenty twenty two
we would strike for our patients
health care facility.
And then subsection do.
That refers to calendar year up
to twenty twenty three.
We would.
Strike operation health care
facility although this
limitations only up to general
July one not for the entire
year.
And so.
But we can.
Have.
What you're saying and that's
fine and on and on.
I want to work.
Mr chair Senator you can't break
it down by the thank you want to
do this like we have like
another year's budget different
calories here another parent
other subsection just rotation
or whatever time here you want
to apply for the seven hundred
fifty thousand.
Hospitals out into its own
subsection and then bring them
back together for the remaining
years we can look it up.
The fact that.
Basically that would have
subsection do.
That would not include our
operation health care facility
but that we would lay it out
again as a new subsection the
without Hospital and instead of
calendar year twenty twenty
three we would say on or after
July one twenty twenty three.
Correct care center.
Yes I I and now it's a
consistent with what's in this.
I might even write that down
just to have a separate
subsection for hospitals
assessors subsection for patient
health.
For all years.
This perfectly clear what's
happening here for your free
time.
That might be this way to do it
to me.
Twenty four they they they merge
back together so you would only
need to create a new subsection
eight.
In order to do that the happier
for the operation health care
facility.
He's passionate about.
Just because it's excluded
twenty twenty two.
And the worst together twenty
twenty four.
So it's only twenty twenty three
that you have to have to break
those up.
It's at this point can we can we
just back up this can you what
I'm hearing is that you can do
what.
I'm asking you thank okay got
your asset can you summarize
what you are asking and then we
can go to the sponsor to see if
that's a friendly amendment or
Castile sharp and and I just
have one last question for the
drafters.
How will the compiler know which
version of forty one dash five
dash three we're talking about.
If we don't specify that we're
amending the.
Mr chair Senator interrupted me
I was the kids the session loss
from the bill from last year and
then section okay great yes so
with that yes yes with that.
So can you restate that once
again would be doing never mind
the last twenty twenty one
chapter sixteen section one we
would lay out forty one dash
five dash three.
With the amendments as they
existed and that H. B. seventy
five minus the words were not an
agent.
We would then instead of section
two and section three we would
lay out forty one dash I dash
six.
With the changes that we
actually being so that is
actually in the law so that in
twenty twenty two it would not
include operation health care
facility and
in twenty twenty.
Three it would
It would be we have one section
for hospitals for calendar year
once when our subsection one
subsection for outpatient health
care facilities beginning July
one.
I personally think we should
keep what the house amendment of
moving up to twenty twenty four
because I think the sixty day
session where we don't have to
worry about it being put on the
map given the and executive
message will be very helpful for
everybody.
and I would right and then and
then we we insert the effective
date of twenty twenty one thank
you they were sick laws and
we're not.
Minus realize the need to hear
from all parties here defined as
a friendly amendment for an
unfriendly amendments as
proposed by Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman can we
just have a minute to discuss
and thank you I think we're
going to do I think is a little
different gentleman okay
Senator.
So I I just confer with the
president the Senate we need to
be down four o'clock this is not
a this is not a a loose said
line gives us fifteen minutes to
try and understand and decipher
with Senator Ivey Soto is
proposing which I'm looking
around the room I think take
some writing and when we did see
if.
And I think there's a number of
other suggestions of the pros
proposers line that the Sanchez
may or may not see value in and
members the committee more may
not.
What what I was going to ask you
centers so if you've got a rules
committee schedule for tomorrow
morning and what's the purpose
the rules committee the aspects.
We want to consider this
something yeah that's not very
important and so so how about
you and I negotiate limit for
those wanting rules committee
conducted Fisher the morning
with a write up of your proposed
amendments them perhaps taking
the input we like to what I have
thrown out as a strong man
amendment to take some Senator
to the site is and perhaps years
and a kind of consideration are
sending your your proposed
amendment makes obviate the need
for the other language that that
I've got here but but I don't
know that I would agree with
that I think that is I think I
think what you're doing is
you're kind of giving us a
reading room what exactly you're
doing this on the on the issues
that time and and but doing it
where does it actually.
Where we're we don't end up
revealing what we intend to do
ten days later.
I don't want to rush this in the
next fifteen minutes and I think
that a press taking any action
right now without the Sanchez
having opportunity really to for
that they need some time to go
for I don't want to rush them
that's on one is I encourage you
we've got three we've got
terrific people your pounds a
service we've got a terrific
Judiciary Committee staff we got
them Senator got you gentleman I
propose the committee use the
next center fifty minutes to
really express general input on
some of the things you proposing
without going into the details
and knows what what I hear you
Mr Singh is you like to postpone
your freedom to New Mexico state
session yes and I and I hear the
Sanchez passing they like the
same thing you all for that I I
don't favor that idea but you
know that that maybe the page
for the pledge of the committee
let's just talk about what we
want to accomplish here there
was a post work on this and I
really would you come in the
morning finish this committee
meeting absolutely and and
and and I'm just I also up.
All of us to pay attention.
Mr oaks when you get this
drafted and your I'll talk about
it afterwards as soon as you get
a lot of proving which may not
be the first in the morning but
but feel free to.
Distributed to into the people
it is stakeholders here so they
can have it.
Alright.
How does that work for the
committee is not a suggestion
makes the most sense I really
hate the idea of trying to rush
this affects in fifteen minutes
And I wanna make sure let's look
the full committee desert desert
Revenue meet tomorrow at nine
o'clock.
We can we can we can push off
rules still after Judiciary if
the building the gesture after
rules.
Seven nine or do.
She said you needed me I think
you said noon but yeah I know
that that might be able to push
the push back but I'm telling
you right now what we're doing
so.
That.
After G. sure that makes the
most sense we're here
just
all on the same.
I'm simply trying to recognize
the reality is working as you're
going to hear the House Bill
presuming that we do what we've
always done for the last twenty
plus years that I've been here
not touch the house bill because
we consider that to be their
business are I do hear that the
Senate has some thoughts on the
Senate districts how House
merry.
Sure the house we have some
thoughts on the Senator that's
why I made the statement that I
do believe that Jason Harper had
informed them that we might
consider as a as amendment here
but none the less yes.
I'm going to assume that the
rules committee will roll honor
decades of tradition and not
modify the house plan and
respect the role of the and we
will respect the rules of the
house which means you're
committee hearing should be
relatively simple I would just
want to go first you will get it
done quickly well that's that's
one option the other option is
to hold under the house bill
just a little bit longer.
So I'm going to call me with the
leadership in the lead of the
floor leader in the present but
I'm I'm just a committee to plan
to be here at nine o'clock for
judiciary continues as
and the and we'll try to have
things in writing tonight or
first thing in the morning you
reach out to us to give us our
fresh argue hope sincerely that
first what we respect people
like Pam in rural and the
judiciary staff this is hard.
This is hard stuff I'm looking
at a lot of people nodding their
heads advanced practice provided
yeah this is pretty tricky stuff
in and of.
And I and I want of this
committee proud of itself.
And to respect itself and and to
know that we're doing excellent
work and I hope that that you
know what happened on the floor
today is something that we will
always remember when the ideas
the suggestion is that this
committee is just sitting on
things for days and and not
acting on of this bill because
it's just strange you for words
I think that was the narrative
on the floor today and then we
should be able to just knock
this out quickly and blasted to
the floor I hope this committee
will always support this
committee
and you know that I'm and I mean
that sincerely this this
commission handed the other
and that's not what happened
today and I I respect the role
of the minority to try blasts
this bill down you you had your
opportunity but I'd like to
think this committee of rises
above that.
Finance committee consisting
feel that there's something to
do that they do together and
I've and I would like to see the
Judiciary Committee but I hope
tonight's an example of that I
hope nothing else that the maybe
there's an agreement that this
bill needed some some work and
some reading some discussion and
and I think we Spirit the
Senate.
All twelve merciful.
A number of hours to think that
we would have done this on the
floor on and I trust that now
folks have an appreciation for
that I I hope so Senator Stewart
thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman
majority leader says I said
we're bumping Judiciary to nine
rules after he says yes okay
session at noon.
So we've got from nine to twelve
for both committee.
Mr Mr Chairman I'm sorry I want
one other point of order
my greatest policies but
tomorrow is the biggest day of
the year at my actual job and so
I'm and I'm expresses to.
But before chairman Toronto's I
will not be able to be here if
you are if this bill is returned
again so I would like to ask
your permission that
representative Ely sits at this
table Representative Gallegos in
my stead.
But it has got to be here for
the for the rules committee of I
think that's that's perfectly
fine.
Him being here tonight I was
wise of moon and I want to thank
all all of the house and Senate
members who were here Senator
Ortiz piano I sew Center pope on
looking around the room
you know etcetera Hickey yes I
think you were going to see back
there you know I think I think
that we were not for this
committee to have an
appreciation for this committee
does in a relatively simple bill
with a simple concept of simple
problem is not a simple solution
and the implications of getting
it wrong far from really
enormous
ten so let's do what we do is a
Judiciary Committee Senate
Judiciary Committee which do
with do excellent work was
turned out an excellent product
and and all all again expressed
my sour grapes we we should have
done this during the.
sixty day session we should have
taken the time to do this and
perhaps we wouldn't be here
today and I hope in the future
this committee will stand firm
and realize that when when
anybody tells us we can't touch
a bill that it's from well done
by everyone else we trust
ourselves.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chairman I hope we can start
at nine because we you know if
we we started a quarter of ten
you know we're delayed for.
Okay.
One nine our.
