On your agenda house bill fifty
seven will also be moved to
Wednesday.
Senate bill fifty three will be
moved to Wednesday.
Senate bill two fifty seven we
will to Wednesday.
Senate bill two seventy a will
have a committees
Senator Shendo that will be on
Wednesday as well.
Otherwise we'll do our best to
hear the remaining number of
items on our agenda we left off
last on Saturday with Senate
bill twenty four Senator Padilla
will resume with your bill you
were taking questions from.
Senator do hang.
And I believe she's part of our
important and so Senator Duhigg
I'm gonna restore the for to you
which is I believe where we left
off with questions on Senate
bill twenty four four Senator
Padilla and that Mr Chairman
with your permission Saturday
we have an amendment that day I
can't recall if you're committee
actually adopted or not to
change the year to keep the
records from two years to six
years we did bring it to your
committee in writing in case you
want to act on that differently
than you did on on Saturday.
My recollection after that
amendment all right then we'll
just leave it there that okay
thank you let me confirm that
with the any members of the
committee who have a different
recollection.
Emily Emily are you able to tell
us easily from where you're at
whether that were the showed
amendment being adopted on
Saturday yes we did have one.
To top that Saturday yeah that
is thank you Mr just want to
make sure thank you so much are
very good all right Senator do
you have the for me and Mr chair
actually looking at some
materials right now that were
sent to me by Center Patillas
expert so if you don't mind all
all all relinquish the floor for
now all well I look at this all
right.
I'm not sure will have other
members with questions at this
time any other room.
Good Senate bill thank you Mr
chairman in the interim I did it
have a couple of discussions
with Senator Duhigg.
shared with her immediately
following the meeting on
Saturday some improper to take a
look at on C. lacks and then
also had my experts meet with
her.
today.
Mr Chairman excuse me at the
center to do we just got the
materials and she's looking at
them I do see her Senator pope
in the room perhaps.
What we can we I don't think
Senate bill eighty will take too
long for us to do we can go to
that and come right back to
this.
Well at which enough speed.
Well when I want to caution
about doing that Senator Ivey
Soto if we we do too much of
that we'll find ourselves
jumping all over the place here.
I understand that
Senator do wants to spend a
couple more minutes looking at
the materials.
We just make sure other any
other committee members of
questions at this time.
So seeing.
Making sure I'm missing not
others.
Senator so all all jump in on.
Help help me to understand a
little bit about the procedural.
I'm sure where this bill is that
right now a one I'm still a
little bit confused by that
there was a PRC action of some
time that matter was appealed to
the surprise says got ourselves
to the Supreme Court there's a
Supreme Court ruling.
and I'm not clear about the
implications of that litigation
that PRC action and and this
particular bill that that
remains my concern at this point
time I I'm I'm very resistant to
the Legislature resolving
litigation
that maybe you know involving
parties are the PRC or spring
court ruling so help me
understand the procedure the
process and how this bill would
not be doing something that
would cause with that concern.
I thank you Mr chairman so this
legislation is the result of
again further clarification to
the New Mexico
telecommunications act two
thousand seventeen when we
implement a pass that bill and
gave the PRC two years to
implement they they did take the
entire two years certainly their
right to do that
we we do feel that
they implemented the lawn almost
the complete opposite the
intention of the law from a
regulatory standpoint there were
several data centers I'm sorry
telephone centers or whatever
that that that they could
regulate and so that the
regulatory
you know.
Hopes that this particular
company yesterday yes to
jump through whenever they have
an issue from Sixers Sixers
somewhere in there too somewhere
over seven hundred now so that
was the complete opposite
intention of what we're trying
to accomplish in two thousand
seventeen because the company to
trucks so much in in the in the
previous ten years somewhere
around eight hundred fifty
thousand connections to
something less than two hundred
and twenty thousand or twenty
nine thousand another down to
like a hundred seventy two
thousand so as all that was
happening there was an action by
the PRC and and I'm just Leo
Baca or or my experts will drive
to good one to talk about where
that is right now but I I didn't
realize that that would stop a
measure that the Legisla- the
legislature you know was
attempting to take her to
clarify with the PRC because
that's really all we're trying
to do today is clarify for the
PRC what their role is in this
regulatory environment now that
the two thousand seventeen law
had been enacted and implemented
we have.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
since I'm not a lawyer I am
going to defer that question to
our our lawyer team that won.
You're on your Mr.
Policies.
Sure so this and Senator Padilla
the Supreme Court proceeding is
not included and there are no
procedural issues the this date
is the the mandate is issued of
the status of the cases that it
is now completed and so the low
the law is what
At least under Senate bill fifty
three the law is what the
Supreme Court has said it is
released allows the commission
to do and so the question is.
As Senator Padilla said is you
want to change that direction
and make clear what Senate bill
fifty three back in two thousand
seventeen was supposed to
accomplish.
Right in
Then Senator but if if you.
As I understand the the answer
that question then this this
legislation would not.
Run afoul of anything in the
Supreme Court decision is that
right.
that Mr chairman and and that Mr
Goodman's comments correct.
And I'm trying to remember from
a presentation on Saturday what
is the PRC's position on this
legislation.
the PRC is split on this
legislation they that they were
I believe it was I supposed to
search for posed in in the two
thousand seventeen at this point
a it is inconclusive because
they chose not to endorse or not
endorse this legislation this
time around I have seven pieces
you know Mr chairman or maybe
you know I don't.
Related to broadband you know
proliferation here in the state
this being one of them and they
chose to take positions on other
pieces of legislation that
package this when they did not
so I I call that progress you do
hear from one of the you do you
do hear from one of the PRC
commissioners on Saturday that
is in full support of the
legislation I believe there was
one other that was going to join
the meeting but was unable to I
don't know if they're gonna be
able I know this will be on
public comment now but but I
just I'll let you know that
and and I'd really like to see
us given the additional
direction to the PRC and that's
all this Senate bill twenty four
today if you're considering
today's is attempting to
accomplish.
so if you look let me start on
page two of your bill by twenty
five this is a deadline of
December thirty one of this year
for the commission to adopt new
rules in the right direction
here is that they drop rules to
accelerate a transition more
regulated telecom industry
and encourage broadband folk
focus committed market center
but if right now you can read my
mind you know what my questions
are going to be about this
language which is what does it
mean to adopt rules to
accelerate a transition of those
how to how to what what how is
that any direction to the PRC to
know what does it mean to
accelerate what does it mean to
the transition wasn't mean to
encourage what does it mean
broadband focused competitive
market do any of those terms
have of have defined meanings
that I should know about.
Well the you know the thing is
we're basically telling them
stop getting mired in a dying in
dying technologies and focus the
state on on broadband now the
PRC does not regulate broadband
but they're going to here very
shortly very very very quickly
and I'm advocating a Mr Barker
Mr good wanted to to just talk
astir talked about the
definitions of the terms of the
chair I mentioned just now.
Well Mr chair Senator Padilla
looking at those words I don't
believe those exact words are in
any definition in the bill but
it's there those are COVID words
that we use and really I might
reading of it is to give the
commission latitude to be able
to accomplish this transition to
be able to take a look at the
market place take a look at the
industry take a look at the
providers look at competition
look at all the various things
that are out there with an eye
on parity with an eye on
consumers with an eye on it
doing the right thing to
encourage competition additional
competition and encourage
investment and the investment in
broadband is what we're all
looking for there's other bills
in the in the session I know
Senator Padilla has a bill and
we're all trying to do all these
things in these other bills well
to encourage more broadband
investment in New Mexico that's
what everyone is looking for and
Senate bill twenty twenty four
is one of those bills that is
trying to accomplish that.
Mr rocket center yet and I
understand that and I support
that my difficulty is always
looking at the laws we pass and
trying to figure out okay how is
somebody going to interpret how
somebody can force has somebody
been applying these laws and so
well I realize that that you're
right these are words we all
know what the words mean but but
in terms of their legal of fact
if I'm passing a law that says
that before the end of this year
the commission shall do
something so we're we're
mandating that commission shall
I then this year adopt some
rules okay then the question is
are they what are the rules have
to do and that's where I get
stuck because it just says rules
have to accelerate a transition.
That to me is so subjective and
ambiguous that I don't know how
you could ever challenge that
enforce that say they did or
didn't do that because the rules
need to accelerate the
transition I know what the words
mean but but in terms of trying
to enforce them or for the PRC
to comply with them I really
don't see how that would have
any meaning and then it says
away from a regulated
telecommunications industry
I understand you have a
regulated telecommunications
industry but it says what the
rules have to encourage a
broadband focused competitive
market again encouraging of a
certain market telling the PRC
you need to adopt rules to
encourage a competitive market
to me has no parameters and it's
it's a subjective and ambiguous
to tell the PRC we want you to
adopt rules that encourage
something to happen that that to
me is not language good really
finds its way into statutes or
laws it's very much language
that I'm expecting to see in
something like a memorial were
encouraging you to do things
were asking excel right things
all of those things here are not
words that that can be measured
or enforced
so let me let me jump ahead in
some other examples of the
similar concerns that we look on
it on page four of the bill.
This section requires that the
these are again we're so
speaking rules and then on page
four talk about the authority of
the commission to establish
reasonable in competitively
neutral quality of service
standards I don't know what is
committee is competitively
neutral is that of the finder or
a term that has some meaning we
say something is competitively
neutral.
I think I'll defer this of Mr
chairman to Mr Goodwin on that
point.
Thank you the chairs about this
in the Senators competitively
neutral is a common term in
telecom Law that's well
litigated well established by a
number of decisions both in New
Mexico state law federal law and
other states federal law and
what it means is as we've been
talking about here competitive
parity that it applies the same
kinds of standards to the same
kinds of companies that are
similarly situated.
In the same way and so
competitively neutral is a term
that it already exists in the
universal service fund in in the
sixty three nine A. six H.
there's competitively neutral
standards are required there and
like I said that's a common term
regarded as well understood well
litigated with plenty of the
corps Authority and parallel
statutory authority in the
state.
Well yes so to follow up so even
the way you describe that to me
is you said that it has
understood meaning of something
between similar companies and
similarly situated once again
that seems to me that that's a
subjective standard and open to
interpretation or litigation
what is a similar company and
what is a similarly situated
circumstance and help me to with
the field that that's not true.
Shares of Hernandez and centers
of commission
As the Senator Padilla said and
and Mr Baca said of the there
is.
The idea here I think is a good
one from a policy perspective
and that is to use.
Guidance with commonly accepted
and commonly litigated and
elsewhere existing terms that
have some room in them for the
commission to explore to apply
its expert of expertise to
regulatory actions within
certain guardrails that are set
up so you we have the idea that
it's supposed to be a
transition.
That's a that is that has been
in the law and the purpose
section since nineteen eighty
five the transition from a
regulated market to a
competitive market place
competitively neutral that's
another term that deficiency is
commonly understood and commonly
used in the in the industry and
the parity of which is down
further on on page four and into
page five point as and this is
how you get to competitively
neutral a specific explanation
of it says that no rules thanks
for the regulation of rates
pursuant to a one or rules
adopted to the rural
telecommunications act this is a
page nine of our land line H. I
says no care should be.
Regulate are placed under
greater more extensive
regulatory requirements than any
other local exchange carriers so
if you take all those provisions
together.
The commission this provides
guardrails for the commission to
apply its expertise in reacting
to the conditions on the ground
today and the conditions on the
ground three years from now five
years from now and ten years
from now.
Actually was gonna describe it
that way but Mr good with she
had a much better way of
describing that and I will just
say Mr chairman you know to
respect you and and and every
time I've almost come for you
you know we talked about the
purpose this and that and I know
you don't like purpose
statements legislation and
that's why we chose to pull
everything out of this
legislation that we actually
felt did not belong there or
need to do or belong there so
just want to mention that thank
you.
I appreciate the center and then
you're right in the mall so that
seems to have been eliminated
all go go back a lot of turned
back to the members the
committee but but Senator I
think you probably know from me
to
when you went in practicing law
for thirty years you're looking
for laws that are clear in the
courts can understand so that we
can advise our clients
accordingly and avoid litigation
over what the legislature meant
that's always the the the the
troubling thing is when the
courts are left to try and
figure out what we meant what we
intended so for example even on
page four if we look at the new
language here again we're
telling the commission to adopt
rules and subsection do in the
line eighteen but we're talking
of these rules need to provide
for reduced regulation.
Compared to the level of
regulations that apply to that
care as of January one two
thousand seventeen to me that is
so broad and ambiguous and
uncertain all worked on the
there's a adopt rules that that
have less regulation than than
the regulation here and really
nothing more than that that's
all we're saying and and I don't
know what it is to say less
regulation compared to other
regulation and that that really
to me is is very very broad
language and and hard for me to
say yeah we did or didn't do
that and that just seems to be
the kind of thing that leads to
eight to five I like your work
guardrails but with I really do
Senator very differently which
thought about putting up
guardrails it's about being very
clear what we want to PRC to do
and we tell the PRC well by this
year we wanted up rules and the
rules were not to me being very
specific about what it is we
want those rules to do or not do
and that to me just usually ends
up with another squabble on
another day and another form so
all that's that's of my thoughts
on the bill right now I think
there's quite a bit of ambiguity
subjective standards in here but
I'll go back to other members
the committee who have questions
or wish to recognize at this
time anyone else at this time.
Senator Moores I see your hand
up no I just want to respond off
my two passed motions on the
table from Saturday.
you're right you did have a due
pass motion.
Any other committee questions or
comments.
Senator do.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for giving me a chance to
to.
Look at this I was just.
I was comparing the so there's
that consumer protection rule
that applies to all carriers and
one that would just apply in
this situation to CenturyLink
I'm but for this bill and so I
was trying to compare those two
rules and see what.
What the difference between them
actually is.
And and there there are some
differences and and I think
they're good ones that to apply
but but overall.
There's so much similarity that
I'm I'm confused about why.
Why CenturyLink.
I K. same we don't want this to
apply to us and and why why they
feel that it's too onerous
because.
The difference is that I I am
identifying.
Are terribly onerous
requirements.
So I'm at least for that the
consumer protection portion of
it I Senator could connects
explained to me.
Why there was an objection to to
the at the adoption of that
rule.
Mr chairman and senator do to
get so I I I briefly mention
this little late by ten minutes
ago when the PRC took their to
the two years to implement the
the law
they they actually wound up
implementing it in the complete
opposite direction of what our
intention was almost complete
opposite intention of our our
office of our intention
this company this particular
company went from I would say
six or ten
Things that they would have to
satisfy to something like seven
hundred and forty six and and
and and Mr Barker Mr Goodman can
give you more detail on that so
naturally they went to the PRC
because that's where they would
go to say wait a minute you know
this this this this is not what
that law was intending and we
shouldn't this should apply to
us and and then so now we're
like well let's let's clarify it
and that's that's why we're here
today with you Mr Barker Mr
Goodman and and before we go to
Mr more Mr chairman Mr I I
guess.
Just to clarify what what I'm
referring to because it might
help them address this
because I'm not I'm just not
seeing.
At least as as pertains the
consumer protection role there
being seven hundred more
obligations placed on on anyone
with this rule so specific to
that rule I'm just wondering
what that.
What why there was an objection
to it Mister chairman Senator
that they can probably describe
it a little better than I can
but so Mister Goodman.
Sure.
Just about this and Senator do I
if you look at those
Regulations particularly the.
There's really very few
differences in the regulations
that apply to us versus all
carriers.
on the consumer protection side
on the surface quality side
you'll see there's some rules
that apply to all local exchange
carriers and some that only
apply to incumbent local
exchange carriers those are
still preserved in the rule but
there conflict it out because of
the rules that apply to us.
But when we were at a mid size
carrier which we reached mid
size care statute status under
the old law because we lost so
many access lines we went down
from eight hundred and sixty
thousand access lines to the
threshold was three hundred and
seventy five we asked that
threshold in two thousand
fourteen now we're under two
hundred thousand but when we
were mid size carrier the rules
applied a few measures on an
annual statewide basis and so
your compliance opportunity was
basically I measures of
different service quality and
would report that on would
report on a wire Center level
but our our exposure for being
fined or punished was those five
measures on an annual basis when
the commission adopted these new
rules and twenty nineteen.
They adopted additional
standards.
For every wire center we have
sixty five wire centers in the
state.
And for each month of the year
so instead of having five or six
different standards that we had
to comply with each year we had
seven hundred twenty seven and
and and Mr Gordon let let me
interrupt you just because
because my mic what question is
really really specific to to why
why were you objecting to that
are not not you but what what
was CenturyLink objecting to the
consumer protection one guy I
hear what you're saying about
the the service quality Roger
but but both both rules were
challenged and so I I'd really
like to know why it's a consumer
protection laws challenged.
chairs of Hernandez in Senator
Duhigg we did not challenge the
consumer protection rules in our
appeal we challenge the order
because the order adopted both
the quality of service rules and
consumer protection rules but we
were clear in our appeal and I
hope the supervise that appeal
we're clear in our appeal that
we didn't have any complaints
with the consumer protection
rules because we thought the
consumer protection rules Hey
they're the type of thing that
we want to do for consumers
anyway and be we thought that
they were a reasonable
advancement of this transition
that's been in the loss since
nineteen eighty five.
Thank you Mr chair
And and I don't you know.
The service quality stuff these
these are not areas that I'm
familiar with admittedly but
just doing I I literally just
did I.
Comparing the two documents of
the one that applies to everyone
and the one that that at the
moment only applies to to
CenturyLink one thing that did
jump out at me was there the one
that applies to CenturyLink has
an enforcement provision that
are it looks like allows that
the commission to issue fines as
part of its enforcement that
doesn't that's not included in
the service quality rule that
applies to everyone is there's
what is what with the
enforcement.
Ability of the commission be.
Where this bill to pass.
But this is Senator Duhigg of
the existing law says that the
standards the service quality
standards and other standards
can be enforced by the
commission's finding authority
and that statutory language is
unchanged by Senate bill twenty
four so we continue to be the
finding dory of the commission.
This.
That's in statute as opposed to
in the rural.
Statute yes that if you look in
terms of the it's citation in
the in the bill it's not
technically in the bill because
the bill doesn't change it
but it is
At.
Page three and page four of the
bill so look at page four lines
one through seven it talks
about.
The authority that this is
preserving the authority of the
commission to establish
reasonable and competitively
neutral quality of service
standards for local exchange
service provided however that
the enforcement of such
standards shall be limited to
the commission's finding forty
and so that that language we're
talk about the funding
authorities in the existing
statute and some change.
Okay thank you I'm sure that's
all I have for now.
Thank you senator.
Thank you other members the
committee with questions.
Senator Stewart I see you.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have a couple questions so first
of all section five what are you
repealing.
Sixty three nine eight dash two
what what are you repealing.
Mr Chairman Allah defer to
Mister good when.
With this in the.
Commission are a center Stewart
and the rest of the commission
or excuse me committee
section two is the purpose
section of the current law
that's the.
sections is this is the purpose
of the New Mexico
telecommunications act that
talks about this language that
has been there since the
nineteen eighty five that's the
language that talks about the
transition from a regulated
telecommunications company or
industry to a competitive market
place we took the principals
from that would put that in the
operated section bill in order
to comply with.
What is the current practice
among the Senate we had a
purpose amendments to the
purpose section and Senate bill
fifty three they got stripped
out and that caused a lot of the
and then we do it in problems
that we've had since that time
so what we wanted to do was make
sure that the purpose sections
were tied to the opposite
substantive sections and made
clear throughout.
So Mister chairman my question
was section five year repealing
sections sixty three dash nine
eight dash two so what are you
repealing.
Mr
chairman church of Hernandez and
sent Senator Stewart a we are
repealing the section that just
talks about the the purpose of
the New Mexico
telecommunications act.
And then that languages then
moved to describe the specific
tasks that the commission is a.
Either a directed to undertake
or prohibited from undertaking
so it's just that generalized
purpose section it says it is
the purpose of the of the
telecommunications act to do S.
and such.
Mister chairman Senator system
Madam pro tempore
we were drafting this in and we
went over several iterations at
it again to to honor with the
cherry said to me multiple times
when I come to this committee
does want to see any purpose
statements does want to see this
that subject only can only have
your bill Dick drafted with what
needs to be in the bill and so
that's what we did there so you
know under my direction I ask
them to remove that section no
they did move some of the
language elsewhere as Mr Goodman
describe not all of it but that
the key elements needed to
remain.
Verily I say much nicer than
that Senator Padilla.
Normally you do Mr chair.
Well and you know it's usually
Mr chairman new bills that you
don't like purpose sections and
I don't think I've ever seen you
take out already statutorily a
written purpose sections but I
could be wrong about it so so
much one of the my biggest
concerns is that this is being
promoted as a bill to expand
broadband but I can't find
anything about broadband except
for the top of page three is
that correct.
Mr chairman the reason that it
will promote broadband is it'll
promote investment into New
Mexico because companies that
operate in this environment will
suddenly have a regulatory
environment that the to tractive
that where they can actually
have a return on investment that
will bring deliverables and and
and so instead of you know choke
holding this company to death
which is what has happened to
this company for for decades now
now they they will bring in
additional investment and what I
mentioned on Saturday with the
advent there with the with the
passing of Santa fifty three in
two thousand seventeen this
company has already made that
decision to do to do some of
that and they brought in forty
six million dollars of the state
already and I believe that if we
can further clarify this for the
PRC and make this environment
but a more workable for a
company like this or any other
company would operate in this
environment The New regular
regulated environment after work
hopefully we were successful
here and then we'll see
additional investment.
And and and and the investment
that comes into New Mexico was
quite frankly it's it's all
going to be broadband I don't
know what else what other
companies going to string wires
all over the place for
telephones any longer because
you can now have your telephone
over the over the internet my
you know my business we don't
have telephones on the desktops
anymore in my business you I
think you're you might be aware
Mr chairman and madam president
I I bill call centers and I fix
them and I do a lot of work in
that area we don't have
telephones on the destiny longer
we we drive everything through
through the broadband
connection.
So Mister chairman is there any
other mention of broadband in
the bill other than the top of
the page three.
Mr chairman and madam pro tem um
Leo Mr Bacchus you're going to
want to take down.
Mr chairman of Senate pro tem
Stewart
I am not sure if the word
broadband is mentioned again in
the bill I'm looking at the bill
quickly right now but a well and
the title it is as well but
But also again with this is
primarily doing is is trying to
create the regulatory
environment.
you know we hear about a lot
about companies that are looking
at coming to New Mexico to bring
jobs to New Mexico and the one
of the key things they look at
is what's the regulatory
environment and all too many
times we hear stories about how
New Mexico has a very harsh
regulatory environment and and
versus other states and really
you know other states
surrounding us of all have a
much
easier not easier but I'm much
more relaxed regulatory
environment and there are many
states around the country that
are not regulating
telecommunications the voice
market that we're dealing with
today they're not regulating
that at all and the sky hasn't
fallen and investment flows to
those states because it's a much
more business friendly
regulatory environment.
Up if I might Senator medicines
and Stewart
At page.
Thirteen of the bill.
In the report and sixty what
would be section for the bill or
section sixty three dash nine
eight twenty one of the law it
exists currently and would
continue to be the purpose of
and the the requirement for the
report from the commission.
To.
Review and investigate report
back to the to this is the
Senate body and the legislature
about investment in
telecommunications
infrastructure and the
availability and deployment of
high speed data services high
speed data services being the
broadband services that you were
discussing and so the the
commission is going to be
accountable for crafting
regulations that furthers and
incentivizes of this investment
in the infrastructure and high
speed data services and
reporting back to the
legislature on their progress.
So Mr chairman I don't know
where you're reading from you're
not reading from the bill right
no that's that's that's from.
That's from the existing law
senator and that's part of the
bills page thirteen
lines one through six.
All right you know Mr chairman
I'm I'm I'm very I'm I'm
troubled by all of the folks
that are against this bill
including that CW eight they've
got just pages and pages of
comments about this bill that I
just don't feel have been
answered so.
You know my my experience with
the PRC is that you know tell
page three just telling them to
encourage broadband focus more
competitive market.
And
that's not enough for them I
mean I've I've passed bills very
explicitly telling the PRC what
to do and they're still not
doing it three years later we
had to take them to court twice.
For the ETA.
Only then did they decide to
follow it so I think telling the
PRC just to broadband not really
good enough for me so thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Stewart other
members of the committee Senator
risotto so your hand of.
It's really interesting when.
That are short started asking
for question I was reading the
exact same language but as new
material from Senate bill fifty
three.
As as a center doing was asking
questions that caused me to look
up Senate bills to fifty three
see what it was what's what is
what's supposed to be happening
here along the way.
And the
Right you know I so I'm here for
I'm stuck on a structural
Sophocles believing a
the regulated environments
recognizing certain
responsibilities of the legacy
carriers and then I'm hearing
the answers to the questions
Senator doing is asking about
the consumer protection.
Stuff and I'm and I'm hearing
the answers to Senator
Stewart's questions.
At the tails with with with the
lack of problems of broadband
despite the fact that that's
what's being discussed you know
we had another bill earlier this
year and Senate Judiciary where
if the bill had done what the
person said that it would have
been a simple bill introduce you
to pass and quite candidly I
kind of feel the same way about
this one if this bill did
what are what what the promotion
of the bill is
the broadband it would be
actually fairly simple belt off
press to pass but it's it's it's
all the other ancillary issues
coming in the bill that I think
make a problem and so Mr
chairman I don't want to stop
debate from other people I know
we have a motion for to pass on
the floor but if we're going to
go to a vote I may have a
substitute motion.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto other
members the committee.
Questions.
I'm looking for hands anyone
else.
Chairman sentencing already also
make most of them do Sir Senator
Ivy Soto we have a due pass
motion pending with Senator
Moores what is your motion Sir I
my most of the AS a motion to
table and and and and and kind
of the several quick also at
good we actually cause
nonfederal that district
remember this bill.
Senator Padilla presented at in
in thanks committee act I think
I think you have the AC I've
been with them all on the bill
and and was promoted as a as an
industry.
Well about all the different
actors in the industry.
R. it appears now that this is a
bill that was actually despite
the fact that we had a C. I
presenting the bill there I
think mistrust and also at the
time people Mr blacked out there
that actually this is a bill
that was that was effectively
fell from the gecko
in in in fifty three and and and
the thing is if those.
Mrs that were made in that bill
had been fulfilled I I think I'd
be supporting this bill it's
just it's just that there's a
there's a huge gap in between
the two R. and and
and and so that's that's where
my that's my cost of so Mister I
would make a motion tabled.
All right tabling motion is not
debatable.
Would you call the roll plans on
a table in motion.
Yes.
Hello yes ma'am.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator
yes.
Senate bill twenty four than
table thank you Senator Padilla
thank you.
The next just so members the
committee that may influence
little bit based we're we're
going to the floor at six
o'clock it's my intention to try
and and the committee by five
o'clock so members have time to
have dinner.
and so we're repeating our
schedule somewhat I have with
the concurrence of the speaker
move to number four Center House
Bill number four percent of
Argenta Wednesday.
Will move house bill fifty seven
to one state.
Will move Senate bill fifty
three center o'neill that years
to Wednesday.
We will move Senate bill two
fifty seven separately at the
level two placements to
Wednesday we will move Senate
bill two seventy eight Senator
Shendo to Wednesday and
otherwise we'll try to get the
others today heard.
The maybe overly ambitious but
we'll give it a shot the next
item
I show would be for Senator pope
and Lopez on Senate bill eighty
I'm looking to see whether
either one of them are in the
committee right now do we have
Senator pope or Senator Lopez we
do ask Mr chair.
Thanks for being here will hear
Senate bill eight Sir go ahead.
Thanks.
Thank you Mr chair I was also
wondering if the operator could
allow Aliah malarkey low archy
Tarja Clovis and age of Brooks
into this more of my expert
witnesses.
Also.
And Sir Paul just about our
thank you so advice given the
schedule we have and I think the
disposition most people have
point of sale remedy will be
helpful.
I agree Senator Ivey Soto and
I've expressed the same concerns
and we're gonna Ingle center
we're gonna do it this way.
On Senate bill eighty I show no
opponents having registered to
speak in opposition I show you
and about a half a dozen
Propontis I'm gonna recognize
you for up to fifteen minutes
although all their courage not
to use the full fifty minutes
but you'll have that Sir and
that'll be for you your experts
in any proponents you want to
recognize in support of the bill
and so the time is now three
thirty two Senator yep fifteen
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair today I will
be discussing.
Committee substitute.
For Senate bill eighty.
And this is the crown Act the
actor acronym for crown.
Means create a respectful and
open world for natural hair this
bill is cosponsored by Senator
Lopez Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Shendo and Pinto and I'd
like to thank them for the
support on this bill so why we
bring this forward it's twenty
twenty one a lot but black women
are still suffering the
suffering from workplace bias
against their natural hair
styles.
These workplace biases and
corporate grooming policies
unfairly affect black women but
also it affects a woman's
ability to celebrate their
natural beauty.
A research study conducted by
dove show that black women are
thirty percent more likely to be
made aware of a formal workplace
appearance policy.
Black women are also eighty
percent more likely to agree
with this following statement.
I have to change my hair from
its natural state to fit in at
the office.
Finally black women are one and
a half times more likely to be
sent home from the workplace
because of their hair.
This is unacceptable black women
which should have to fear
scrutiny and discrimination when
expressing our natural beauty in
the workplace not only is this
disc a discrimination issue but
inequity issue as it has a
social and economic cost.
This bill seeks to remedy this
by any discrimination at our
public schools charter schools
workplaces New Mexico would be
the astute the past this type of
legislation which is also been
passed in the US house of
representatives and more
recently through the City of
Albuquerque by unanimous vote.
The bill we're introducing today
is one most inclusive built in
the country providing
protections for rate space
hairstyles and hair coverings
for all people.
On a personal level I have felt
discrimination myself as a child
in school this may come as a
surprise to many of my
colleagues here in the Senate
but I can't remember going to
school and being teased and I'm
fairly treated.
I was the only black student in
the school that I went to and I
remember being teased and you
know asked if bill crow sticks
to my here you know our one time
leaving school.
And being sent home because I
was being teased for having my
hair done in corporate.
I am not getting the support
that I needed from school staff
so we're truly going to make New
Mexico a New Mexico for all we
must have protections in place
that respect all New Mexicans.
so now I would like to introduce
ally milia larking and have for
speak for a few minutes Mr
chair.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is Melina
Luarkie I am the co founder for
indigenous women rising
I support this bill because I'm
a black mobile woman I from the
left in a reservation and as a
child I was constantly teased
and disrespected because I look
different the teasing was
limited to just fellow
classmates but to their parents
and school faculty as well.
I began straightening my hair
from the age of ten to twenty
years old I'm not twenty four as
I've gotten older my fear for
younger black and indigenous
students has been high and no
child should ever have to worry
about a fellow student or
teacher disrespecting them
because of their hair imagine
your elementary student coming
home and asking you to help
achieve things that people
through in their hair then one
day having to take into account
what college or job that you may
not be considered for because of
your natural hair.
All as a young professional
myself I left the film look my
best for any occasion whether in
school are for work we deserve
to participate without wondering
if we will be discriminated
against for our hair styles in
twenty eighteen according to the
bureau of labor statistics
statistics excuse me fifty three
percent of the black labor force
for black women black women
we're keeping this economy alive
in twenty eighteen and our own
state we made national news for
teacher who cut in need of
students here as a black in
public women I understand the
power and the divinity our hair
holds for so long it's been
disrespected and taken from us
it's time we received the
respect we deserve.
Most black people most people
have share that requires for
care and being seen as
irresponsible are incapable of
being how our hair has roots in
racism knowing I could
potentially take care of my
family and my myself and my
family the rejected due to my
hair is unjust I urge you to
support this bill thank you I
yield my time.
Thank you Mr chair I'd also like
to introduce Asia Brooks and
Tory Jacobus they will be
speaking at this time but what I
will do is allow them to help me
they'll be expert witnesses and
help me answer questions.
So we're ready for public
comment or any questions
researcher thank you senator
pope
the number of individuals dented
by themselves is supporting the
bill on a soap up Erica Davis
crown.
With New Mexico women and
families coalition Nicole Rogers
with a will stand foundation
Amanda Aragon with New Mexico
kids can Maryland back with New
Mexico child first network
Richard Dick Mason with the
league of women voters and.
Book a move con add to pool I'm
sorry had to PO I think requests
for the my apologies to you of
there being a no opposition and
Senator for your presentation
being complete as I understand
it will needs go to members of
the committee members the
committee with questions.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I move that do not
pass the Senate bill eighty and
a do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty.
Want to tell the young woman
that spoke to us how beautiful
her hair looks.
Second.
There's a motion and second.
I'd love to compliment others on
the committee about their hair
but I think.
It's often ethics complaint of I
do so so I'm I'm learning never
to compliment anyone ever again
Other members of the committee.
Questions wanted to pass motion
saying no committee members for
debate or discussion.
Emily would you call the roll a
do pass motion please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Wirth I think you're
beautiful here Mister chair yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator this yes.
I hope you have a do pass.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I appreciate thank you
have a great evening thank you
do we have Senator Steinborn in
the committee.
I do not see Senator Steinborn
okay I would have at this time
heard Senate bill eighty two
centered Sam on radioactive
waste will go next to.
Senate bill one ninety we have
Senator Hemphill.
In the committee.
Mr chair I do not the Senator
Hemphill either.
We still have Senator poker you
Senator around Center pope.
Senate bill two sixty eight.
We don't have Senator
We have Senator Pinto on Senate
bill two seventy six yes I'm
here Mr chairman members of the
committee well it's your lucky
day center Pinto.
You just jump ahead about three
four spots good for you.
Bill two seventy six regional
hazmat.
Yes.
They can begin Mr Chairman
Senator Pinto just so so you're
familiar with our procedures and
processes let me pull up some
information on your bill.
Senate to seventy six.
So I know opponents have been
registered in opposition to your
bill senators so please be
mindful of that in terms of the
time commitment we're allowing
up to fifteen minutes for you to
present your bill with any
expert witnesses and the members
of the public for others you
wish to recognize we have
registered in support I'm Brian
Blaylock and Matthew Stackpole
if you recognize those recognize
those individuals you may want
include those in your fifteen
minutes and time is now three
forty one you may begin.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senate bill two
seventy six require state
agencies to coordinate
development of a regional
volunteer response team to
assist with hazardous materials
accident responses the bill
amends the definition of
hazardous substances to include
viral diseases including the
Corona virus disease of twenty
nineteen.
The bill amends statute defining
their state states
responsibility for management of
accidents immunity from
liability cooperative agreements
private property because
provisions to allow for regional
volunteer team made up of state
employees.
The assistant to assistant
accident response at the
discretion of the state
director.
The bill requires a designate to
designate one person
knowledgeable in accident
response to be the agencies
training officer and will be
responsible for this assisting
in training volunteers and
coordinating with other state
agency response teams.
This Regionalbahn to response
team shell assist local
governments in accident response
and this was a combination of
what happened in my district
within the police officers and
some of the and my that will
responding to providers that's
within the home that were
unattended became very limited
as some of the men also became
exposed to the Corona virus due
to the unforeseen circumstance
of the contagion contagious
missed and the lack of PPE
within the area so we were.
Pretty much undermanned in that
sense going into this
The pandemic started to escalate
even higher.
So I'm hoping that the state can
assist in this matter so that
we to call it a volunteer team
in so that the individuals able
to evaluate their own situation
and family situation on whether
they should put themselves at
risk in that manner but also
that when we talk about
hazardous materials and not
knowing you know we can't see
the future in that sense but
that we don't get caught.
In a manner where we cannot
assist or help
with those.
When we get to the to to the end
of that that part of the the
cleanup in these areas
especially not rural areas we do
have a very limited highly
limited force that is able to
respond and clear out
when we see the pathologies in
these cases so with that Mr
chair I stand for questions and
I did try to have Mister I'm
Stackhouse from the.
department of homeland security
and emergency management on I
don't know if he was able to
make it and
Someone from the NMED.
And I think you all got the FIR
so I stand for questions Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much we
so I have a couple minutes in
the advocacy we have Brian
Blaylock or Matthew Stackpole in
the third **** Mr chair I can't
find either of them.
Very good and as I mentioned
there are no opposition
registered on this bill will go
to members of the committee for
questions and comments and all
as members raise your hand to
get on to my list.
Some scanning for your names.
Members of the committee
discussion I have Center o'neill
in center Ivey Soto with
questions after which we may be
taking motion center o'neill
first.
I was going to make a motion so
I'll defer to Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Ivey Soto if you're on
discussion will go to you and
then we'll come back to center
on the oil for motions I was
gonna make a motion filed a bill
I'll defer to senator now
generally with a motion.
What I was gonna differs center
I was okay
set yeah I move a do pass.
On.
Senate Bill to seventy eight as
amended no I'm sorry the other
one.
Yeah two seventy six I move the
presence about two seventy six
thank you as we were going back
and forth you Senator o'neill I
was aware this was started what
the three Stooges.
What we're good Senator o'neil
with a do pass motion Senator
Ivey Soto certainly seconded it.
Emily roll call vote please on
Senate bill two seventy six.
Welcome.
Yes.
Yes.
So yes ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Thank you yes.
Yes yes.
Senator Pinto you how we do
passed motion.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee the
committee thank you Mr chair
Senator Steinborn and in the
room.
We were looking for your earlier
nine now you guys just move your
agenda you exceeded expectations
so I I would I and then another
committee right now so I got got
to to let them know it's a good
excuse
and we're always exceeding
expectations of that or Senator
Steinborn Senator eighty two as
amended we had previously had
you on the schedule you and I
communicate a little bit by
of tax we're not speaking
unfortunately in as much detail
as of like but but there was a
question about a prior amendment
that had been on an earlier
version of this bill passed by
the Senate and I ask you to give
us a report your muted Mr
Chairman zero I I should being
does anybody else the survey
hear me and hear I can hear you
perfectly fine yeah Senator
Steinborn you should be able to
hear me okay now I can't we are
about that I'm here I I heard
Susan we have you schedule
previously was a there was a
question by the committee
members about an amendment that
had been previously adopted and
was not included on your bill
would you just let us know what
the status of that Amanpour Mr
chairman there was an amendment
opted last year not this session
that really is.
Meeting less but and so I took
it out I know that we all
appreciate economical language
and putting in new law having
said that someone brought it up
it's important it doesn't hurt
the bill it doesn't help the
bill it's just.
So I I had prepared it's before
you all if that's important we
can certainly consider it and I
would consider it family it you
might consider it a little bit
I needed but up certainly it's
there if you all would like to
consider that's the only
amendment I can think of Mr
Chairman was one we had a year
ago that I took out of this
year's version of the bill Mr if
you want to do before we get to
the presentation of if I
somebody has to come up on the
screen will be happy to make the
a motion on behalf of centers
and we're.
Right we have the image of the
proposed amendment on the screen
so Representative I hear you
making a motion to adopt the
minutes that right yes
Representative.
And all second that.
Senator Ivey Soto to explain the
amendment please certainly so
that's that's what ma'am those
added in the Judiciary Committee
after there's a lot of back and
forth between people and it just
simply doesn't recognize that
we're dealing with a multi
jurisdictional issue what it
does the whole track of the rest
of this you'll hear in senators
time once presentation but it is
simply puts it in the correct
context.
Thank you and I've heard the.
Senator Steinborn the Kate this
amendment would be friendly.
We can get a full look at the
screen again of the members and
all I ask of those present if
there is any further discussion
on the proposed amendment.
Show hands please anyone who
wishes to further discuss the
amendment.
Right now I'm seeing none is
there any objection to the
adoption of this amendment.
I'm saying none Emily would you
record that all members of the
committee present voted for
adoption of the amendment with
Senator Steinborn with your bill
now amended Senate bill eighty
two.
Give me just a minute let me see
what I have for your bill.
Senator Steinborn I see.
I don't center somewhere you
have expert witnesses thank you
Mr chairman Terry next with the
State Land Office and she might
be in the waiting room I'm not
sure if she'd been allowed in
here I don't show her is being
registered but if she's
available will letter into the
committee also for proponents we
have Lynn Moore were.
Senator Steinborn the the
practice on this committee is to
allow the sponsor up to fifteen
minutes as they choose to use it
it's up to you and your expert
or any proponents the register
proponents is Lynn Moore and so
would you plan your fifteen
minutes to recognize those
proponents are experts as you
see fit we have about I
opponents registered they will
have ten minutes collectively to
oppose the bill if they decide
to do so jointly they can use up
to the ten minutes any one of
them otherwise all divide the
time equally among the opponents
so Senator Steinborn the time is
now
three fifty one you have fifteen
minutes Sir Mr chairman I seek
Karen Douglas also present one
of the legal women voters
chapter whose care and support
the bill because it was schedule
the other day it's kind of hard
for advocates to be able to
track it and participate so
about to give occurring
opportunism not gonna need
anywhere near that time and I'd
like to give occurring in
support you know who's also
parents support anyone else
insurance support speak with are
a lot of time if that's okay
some of them all that in under
the wire for the other meeting
but.
So we're clear center somewhere
you have fifteen minutes to do
as you wish you can recognize
anybody our equipment found that
I'm giving it to you to cut
people off for limit yourself
all right as you deem
appropriate right thanks Mr
Chairman lamanna I'm gonna dive
into it and keep it as simple as
possible Mr Chairman this is a
bill that the committee as you
pointed out her before and
passed before
It's simply amends an existing
task force which is an executive
level task force of the state of
New Mexico Senator executive
level agencies we had a few that
didn't exist when we when we
founded this task force for whip
primarily to be a state
instrument to look at all the
issues involving very important
issues the state entrance
regarding the wet and its
impacts for the state what this
Original Bill did not task force
did not contemplate was private
storage of high level nuclear
waste that was not a proposal
yet it was on our table
obviously right now we have a
very consequential proposal
that as before the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission to store
potentially the entire nation's
high level nuclear waste in the
state of New Mexico.
If approved by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission if this
move forward this would involve
thousands of shipments of spent
nuclear fuel coming in by armed
guard to all parts of New Mexico
by a private company.
According to the company itself
that there were to be an
accident will be the
responsibility of the state
government and local governments
to do emergency preparedness.
major industry like years in the
oil industry and agriculture
come out against it those are
terribly concerned about what
would happen if there be an
accident in the Permian basin to
those affected industries.
And so.
What this bill does Mr chairman
and am I might add when this
proposal came down the pike it
was during the previous
administration when I asked and
I you for what it's worth you
may not know I'm the previous
chair of the radioactive and
hazardous material center
interim committee.
Which is a committee in law to
have oversight of Los Alamos
National Laboratory with and
these very important issues for
the state to doing my job we
have lots of hearings on this
proposal and I asked the
previous governor.
how this would affect all these
different areas in our state she
wrote that's not my job that's
not my problem we're not
required by state law even look
at these issues.
And so what this bill does Mr
chairman is this what's that all
this requires that we not only
this proposal but as we move
forward that never again will
the citizens be caught off
guard.
or the legislature instead
require the executive.
The executive branch to do with
the actual impact analysis
related to public safety health
economic development of our
state of these types of
proposals a private high level
waste and report to the
legislature.
Right now by law this cast force
in this you'll see it in here is
required to report to the
radioactive hazardous materials
interim committee quote
regularly.
What this bill does is it
upgrade that to at least
annually so it's really a great
bills to to get the executive
agency to be executive branch to
engage the legislature
frequently on these types of
issues make us aware of them
have a real dialogue and
Or have the stand so that we can
look at these types of issues.
Some people said this is a
regulation bill that this is an
advocacy billable tack and
sure hope that doesn't confuse
me is an advocate for the
project in fact I led a group of
nineteen legislators to engage
the application for this project
and opposing the project is I
don't believe it some long term
interest in New Mexico and what
this bill does for those who are
work and environmental issues at
the federal level this is like
the national environmental
policy act what's known as need.
Except for high level waste for
New Mexico this just requires a
review of these issues and
reports to us it's it's.
And our some people you'll hear
today say we should do it
because it somehow welcome that
that's frankly with all due
respect the ludicrous argument
anymore the need but is a
welcome mat for anything it
reviews it's merely a clear eyed
evaluation with that Mr chairman
and it doesn't regulate the
regulation or the negotiation is
all in related to only federal
disposal facilities we've added
in this bill is simply an impact
analysis for private waste it
does not give any authority to
negotiate for these facilities
it's simply an impact analysis
that are amendment do you mean
restore the language last time.
Jack already.
just somebody needs.
Yep we need we have some more
overlap there's someone I'm
sorry for the interruption there
somewhere used on the floor so
with that Mr chair we get in a
previous committee at the State
Land Office at the request to
this task force is been very
engaged in health tech now like
to ask Miss next to be able to.
Express our thoughts on this
piece of legislation.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I do
not need this the next in the
waiting room.
She said she's not being laid it
let in don't know why.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I
don't have anyone under that
name if they would like to.
Reply that the invitation I can
see what I can do.
Okay when I just sent it to her.
And maybe she can get in.
Bear with so with that I would
quickly while we're waiting on
Terrence just allow one minute
each to care and and
And miss more.
So we can allow time for Karen
Terrence who they're trying to
emit center someone Erin it next
with the State Land Office.
It and then did you mention a
current Douglas yes Karen
Douglas is online as is
More and more yes you have until
four you have to until four oh
seven senators time were to hear
any the proponents or experts
want to allow and all right okay
thanks.
Thank you Karen would you like
to say we're.
Thank you so much chairman and
senators.
Can you hear me we can hear you.
My name is Derek excited that
deputy commissioner of public
affairs for the State Land
Office I am glad that we are
added into this legislation do
you feel that the time to act is
now and this frankly is the only
time we have left to act we do
believe that the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission will come
out in a related favor of whole
tech at between may and August
sometime related favor of the
disposal sites
you know I will be double the
service.
At a potash company does but we
on the subsurface beyond the
hundreds of millions of dollars
potash sitting around us under
the spare.
Both the.
It will be and we also pulled a
lot happens are in a lot of
those leaseholders joined us in
protest this sites we've done
everything we possibly can we're
going to the new administration
now but you placements to the
NRC still stay at so if you're
pretty confident that it's going
to happen and now is the time
Mexico to get ahead of the curve
partly with this task force and
also partly with lawsuits much
like we had to do with that I
will have to do the same thing
with all tax and so the sense of
urgency it's great and I hope
you can assist
tonight we can get it out of the
Senate over to the house and
very quick process because I
think you all want to have a
voice in what happens down the
road except the road is very
short so thank you for letting
me be here and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Mr Chairman before I move on to
the to to the proponents I I did
want to also ask for everyone's
knowledge.
Different governments around New
Mexico including in southeastern
New Mexico the community of gel
but the city of Los crucis the
state of Albuquerque Santa Fe
County McKinley County we
McKinley County of all passed
resolutions opposing hope that
proposing the transportation of
this waste they certainly are
wanting us to advocate be clear
eyed on this and I think that's
to support information for you
all to know with that mistrust
one minute and I don't know that
miss more is online but before
care.
Okay thank you very much our.
Shares the wrong patient
Senators I'd like to address you
today I service the call press
we were both disincentive New
Mexico I mean engineer and I've
shared our state spent nuclear
fuel storage committee since
twenty seventeen we have an
efficacy statement on this
approved by their national
organization December twenty
nineteen and just to drive the
state position during our board
meeting last Saturday the legal
borders support Senate bill
eighty two and recognizes that
it does not schools or support
it simply provide state
oversight the process it
provides briefings to interim
committee it buys when safety
provisions are violated I it
insures that the state has the I
the activities and proceed as
minutes next had mentioned they
expect that you're saying you
valuation report to be approved
by the N. R. C. and maybe twenty
twenty one the our environmental
impact statement the final
statement to be issued by an R.
C. in July twenty twenty one and
then when those documents have
been issued in our State can
issue a license to both the
whole K. in the in terms storage
partners site which is five
miles from Eunice New Mexico the
New Mexico Texas border so the
voters approves of the bills and
recommends that task force three
things be at least annually as
mentioned and if possible be
more frequently and whenever
safety provisions may have been
violated we recognized that dry
cask storage previously in the
United States has only been for
thirty five years and this will
be for an extended time period
I'm.
That.
Even seen internationally
previously and we recognized
that the state should be aware
of the proceedings and again
this bill doesn't propose either
the whole pack or the interim
storage park owners but only
provide oversight the woman
lotus of New Mexico which is a
do pass on Senate bill eighty
two.
You on the floor right now.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
I am more of Los crucis an
environmental attorney with
extensive experience in nuclear
waste issues was testifying in
an individual capacity today
thank you for this opportunity
Madam I support just be eighty
two because as our state
continues to become more and
more the choice of private and
several entities looking for a
place to dump their nuclear
waste that expands the number
and type of state players who
will evaluate their proposals as
important it will help assure
that the task force's evaluation
is disseminated publicly to the
legislature the governor and the
executive department to bear
responsibility to protect our
interests the task force needs
as SP eighty two provides a
broad purview to enable it to
discover and consider all
relevant information that could
affect the public safety
environmental health
infrastructure and
transportation acts out impacts
on the citizens of New Mexico
this might include for example
assessment of the veracity and
completeness of an application
and then track record of the
proposed licensee in other
states it has operated it is
crucial that all relevant
information is transparently
known in order to protect us our
urge you all to recommend
passage of SB eighty two thank
you for your consideration of
this important issue.
Thank you very.
Mr Chairman I don't know unless
there's another proponent you
might be at a time but that
maybe it.
You're just right there center
someone good job we had a minute
to spare.
This call consider luck all
right well we'll next go to the
registered opponents I have them
in this order if the host would
confirm that there are
In the conference and they can
be admitted I have John Heaton.
just got.
Mayor of Bill Jennewein.
Susan Crockett.
And Jack involved Pato
of the less I'm told that
there's a spokesperson who's
going to organize the time all
divide that ten minutes for
opposition equally to all of you
which means each one of you will
have about a minute and a half.
is there a is there a
spokesperson coordinating the
opponents first of all.
Mr Chairman.
this is John Hayden.
I think we are organized to some
degree.
as organized as we can right.
This F. for this effort all
right Mr of Mr Heaton former
representative John what I'm
doing is instead of just letting
everybody have their one minute
and doing it kind of a and and
bullet fashion I'm giving you a
full ten minutes organizes you
wish you can dig into the issues
as deeply as you wish to because
you're telling me that you're
prepared to coordinate that I'm
gonna ask you to of introduced
admit and cut off any of the
speakers within the ten minutes
so it's now four oh eight.
You'll have to for eighteen to
oppose the bill all right.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman again my
name is John Heaton and I'm a
member of the Eddie Lacy Energy
Alliance board we have been
working hard in southeast New
Mexico to diversify our economy
and we have discovered a niche
with safe nuclear projects we
face the ups and downs of the
oil and gas industry as does as
do other communities dealing
with the extraction of a
commodity pro tem Stewart has
just passed a sustainable New
Mexico built with the task force
formed to attempt to find
solutions to diversify our
economy away from oil and gas
what is interesting about the
work that will be done is that
the nuclear industry will
probably not be considered when
it is potentially the best
developed industrial cluster in
our state.
Consolidated interim storage is
another one of those safe
projects we have been working on
for some eight years the project
brings three hundred fifty jobs
a capital expenditure of three
billion dollars we expect
seventeen to twenty five million
in revenue sharing annually to
New Mexico the facility is a
subsurface solid concrete
fortress the transportation
system is heavily regulated by
the NRC F. R. A. and the
department of transportation the
NRC says the risk of a breach of
a transport costs Cass is one of
the billion and further more no
radioactive material would be
released the NRC has some three
hundred engineers and scientists
committed to the health and
safety of the public and
Congress has given them the
exclusive role the sole
authority to license private
nuclear projects it totally exec
totally free apps the state Mr
chairman and committee it is
this type bill that sends a
negative message and poll the
state back I ask you why would
the state spend four hundred and
eighty thousand dollars
reviewing what the NRC does
wouldn't it be better to spend
that money on education this is
a great project and is as benign
as the desk where you're
standing it has no pop snow
motors the minutes nothing it
just sits there in a silo and
the case every day all day thank
you Mr chairman and committee Mr
Scott would be the next to
speak.
Thank you John Mr chairman
committee thank you before I
start just one I just got a tax
a.
If the operator would allow
Susan Crockett to ensure the
zoom meeting we would appreciate
that very much.
Chair Mister Scott do not have
this in Crockett.
In the waiting room.
Okay thank you operator.
again my name is chair just got
and I represent all check
international here in New Mexico
We appreciate the opportunity to
speak on Senate bill eighty two
all tech believes in
transparency as a company is
passionate every question by the
NRC.
The opposition to the bill is
released as Missy he misstated
of the project already has
oversight provided by the NRC
the agency has the experts and
the experience that is needed to
provide guidance to the state of
New Mexico and the local
communities this proposed
project
if the committee has any other
questions either myself or Mr
Heaton be happy to answer any
concerns that you all may have
thank again thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Mr chairman the next would be
more Jan Dale Dan way.
And I think he is going to route
Kyle mark signers gonna read a
comment from him the more
couldn't make it.
It is a great great more
children long days and members
of the Judiciary Committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment.
My name is Dale January and I'm
speaking as the mayor of the
city of Carlsbad I am speaking
in opposition to SB eighty two.
There been raised questions at
the state and national level
about the importance
diversifying our economy.
We are very aware this need for
diversity which is one of the
reasons why we have been
supporting of this partnership
with OPEC in the story.
This project has strong support
in Carlsbad interim committee
can.
Our city council is passed
several resolutions in support
of the storage and community
members have turned out in large
numbers to speak in favor at
the.
The safety reviews for both the
consolidated interim storage
facility in the process of
transporting to this facility
have been thorough this will be
a world class facility which
will create jobs for New
Mexicans and generate revenue
for New Mexico thank you.
Mr Chairman.
I don't think our other two
speakers are online they both.
Are working folks and I don't
think they could get away from
their their jobs as miss
Crockett could somehow couldn't
get into the waiting room so I
don't I don't know what to tell
you about that and Mr Roboto is
unable to attend as well just if
I may a couple of extra
comments.
Of.
I can't tell you how much we
have investigated this before we
ever began and barking on the
project it was the Blue Ribbon
commission that president Obama
put in place that.
provided the guidance for the
Blue Ribbon commission to be
able to investigate what needed
to be done related to.
Right back into the nuclear I
feel cycle and it will interim
storage was one of their
centerpiece recommendations
because obviously a repository
at this time is probably twenty
years away and so in order to
bridge that it was they believe
that interim storage was
a necessary part of the system
for the back end of the fuel
cycle and so we took it upon
ourselves at that time to visit.
A number of of nuclear power
plants and look at the different
storage systems that were
available we went to they can
pass canister manufacturing
companies to look at them and
how that how that operation
occurred we went to the NRC had
meetings with them about what
the price of their process was
so I'm just trying to emphasize
to you that we didn't take this
project on lightly that the
board of the Eddie Leie Alliance
worked very diligently to ensure
the safety of this project and
we all believe that that is
absolutely the case that this is
an extraordinarily safe project
and we hope that.
The committee.
Will look at this at this bill
and what it really provides
because it really can't find
anything over and above what the
NRC does and the spectacular
reputation that the NRC has so
with that Mr Chairman.
I have.
John he's here I looks like your
video has frozen.
As best I can tell you we you
may have
That connection for you are all.
Right.
If by some all of the committee
members are in the same.
Addition I held and.
Mr Chairman were you able to
hear me.
You we lost about the last
fifteen seconds just somehow
summarize for me please mystery
it's this is just a great
project again for southeast New
Mexico it creates jobs and helps
the state of New Mexico and it
does a huge amount for our area
and help in diversifying our
economy so again thank you very
much committee and Mr chairman.
Thank you
there are no other members on my
register lists for opponents or
proponents will go to members of
the committee for questions and
I can see hands for those who
wish to get on the list to be
recognized.
We'll start that way.
In announcing though committee
members.
Asking to speak to a tech center
Ivey Soto question comment or
motion Sir.
Mr Chairman I remember extended
discussion we had on this last
year we did we applaud the
amendment which I do appreciate
Senators time we're bringing
back and I also know the
involvement of the state land
office which I think is crucial.
So unless somebody else wants to
delve into this I would just
have to move it to pass on this
bill as amended.
The motion for the bass is in
order second anyone.
Hi all seconded unless there's
another member of the Senate do
it with the second all right
Emily we call the roll on a do
pass motion as amended please.
Yes.
So yes ma'am.
No.
Hello.
Senator Stewart.
She.
Yes.
Senator this yes.
So this time we have a due pass
motion on Senate eighty two as
amended by this committee.
That's great thank you so much
committee I really appreciate
this vote for the state of New
Mexico okay thank you very much
Senator Hemphill we had called
for your earlier I believe here
in with the committee
I'm don't take this as punitive
but I'm gonna jump over to
Center developers been waiting
releases we begin here today it
has other committee commitments
of so and I think his bill will
be relatively brief so we'll
hear Senator of elements Senator
Kernan.
On two eighty one and three
sixty five and then come back to
Senator Hemphill and Center pope
stay with us because we'll try
to get all you done that's
ambitious I want to be breaking
the committee if I see can get
dinner before we go back to the
floor.
Mister chairman Senator Woods is
also been sitting in the
committee for a while and I know
he's stepped out of finance to
do so.
I would suggest strongly Center
woods the wait to we call you
the so what is a pretty
extensive bill I know that it's
important Hughes center Ivey
Soto you discuss that with me
it's a pretty extensive bill I
think you're gonna find Senate
to eighty one three sixty five
are going to be to build so we
can hear very quickly if we we
try so let me hear next from
Senator Novell on two eighty one
please.
You Mr chairman Mr chairman
Senate bill two eighty one is a
related to some of the COVID
issues in it so basically for
the people who have leader
contracts to re negotiate those
contracts
Because they were unable to
perform properly during the
COVID period because whatever
their particular enterprise was
I do have state I guess he's on
Scott Scanlon expert if we have
any additional.
Questions that I can't cover and
with that I'll stand for
questions Mr chair.
You guys.
No I'm sorry I'm sorry we were
muted so Senator well here's
what I've got I've got no expert
witnesses or or public
proponents or opponents
registered on your bill so we're
ready to go to committee will go
there trying to earn a I did
have says seeing Scott skins
name if we need to do he
represents a client who's in
this position so if we need to
go ahead with the committee Mr
Chairman right committee members
on to anyone.
Questions we want.
So as I understand the Center
Moore's question number two
thousand there's no discussion
all right we'll take your motion
I just have a couple questions
real quick but we have a due
pass center Moores.
Senator novellas I understand
your bill your you would
authorized with regard to lead a
funding a renegotiation of the
existing leadership commitment
so long as the the party
recipient of the Leda funds can
demonstrate that the of the
inability to perform is related
to COVID layoffs is that right
that's correct do.
Issues health order whatever in
COVID issues they were labeled
we're unable to perform their
obligations and of the country.
Very good all right understood
the the bill correctly as I
thought senator Morris with the
motion for to pass I'll second
the motion any other committee
discussion.
Emily would you call the roll
please.
Yes.
Okay so.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
You yes.
Yes.
This yes Senate bill you have a
do pass thank you for being
patient today we have Senator
Kernan on three sixty five.
Thank you Mr chair and today I
have Senate bill three sixty
five there is an amendment I
said that to Emily and also to
Mr Lehrer gore date I don't know
if you have received that in the
committee
but basically if if I could just
tell you a little bit about the
bill it.
Amends the New Mexico home loan
protection act with regard to
the frequency and limits of
adjustments permitted to be made
to adjustable rate mortgages
originated in New Mexico and the
bill is necessary and I would.
Like to let my experts tell you
a little bit more about that
Larry her grand it's the
operator would allow him into
the ring he can not you can
respond to what we need to do
this and current Senator yellow
a couple of things we have no
registered opponents on your
bill to be heard in a okay I
know Register proponents so
other than you Mr Fran that's
what we show in the bill we
would begin at four twenty three
if you would to limit your
presentation advocacy for ten
minutes please all right thank
you Mr chairman and if Mr Karan
would would like to to say.
More about the bill I would
yield to him.
And I know he's been in the
waiting room so I'm not sure
prior call center current I'm
here Mister chairman I apologize
I forgot to on mute can you hear
me now.
Yes.
Okay Larry Herman registered
lobbyists New Mexico mortgage
lenders association Mr chairman
members of the committee well
I'm what this bill does is it
amends a home on protection act
to all to.
To reflect the change that
occurred at the federal level
currently adjustable rate
mortgages under the home loan
protection that can only be
adjusted once a year for a total
adjustment of a total of two
percent at the federal level
they they used to use what's
called the one of their their
indexing Agency change from a
live or to so for which stands
for secured overnight night
financing right so you so for to
for the indexing for just rate
mortgages to make a
determination as to when those
mortgages can be adjusted at the
end of twenty twenty all we're
gonna have to switch to those
those so for rated adjustable
rate mortgages and the
difference is those can be
adjusted every six months only a
total of one percent it is every
six months so in order for us to
continue to be able to utilize I
just worry what mortgages in New
Mexico we have to have a change
in statute to allow us to make
that same adjustment which is
the right can change every six
months for a total rate changed
during that time period one
percent so over over the one
year time period doesn't affect
the homeowners anymore than
current statutes but it'll it
brings us back in line with what
they're doing at the federal
level and with that will stand
for questions.
Mr chairman if I would have the
amendment but back up on the
gonna be happy to make about.
In Mr chairman and in center
Ivey Soto this amendment comes
if you look at the if you look
at the fiscal impact report from
our regulation licensing I've
worked with Rebecca Moore who's
acting F. I. D. director
financial industry division
director on this ammendment and
that was this was at their
suggestion and so we agree with
the proposed amendment.
I can only presume having the
additional loans involved one of
what about burden on their on
their department.
So and Mr Chairman if I could
just simply clarified so this
basically page six.
Lines thirteen through sixteen
all of the proposed in service
from of.
Yes that's correct in that part
of on seventeen until the work
act right which is also part of
the test yes.
Senator Kernan my understanding
is that you consider as a
friendly amendment yes that's
correct Mr chair in the center I
was little here but moving the
amendment after members the
committee on the amendment alone
are there any questions.
Seeing none with the members
present is there any objection
to the adoption of the friendly
amendment.
Saying none Emily please record
all members supporting the
amendment I don't present I
don't know what to do about
senator o'neill of.
Under the circumstances I other
areas okay good good all right
center o'neill also on the
amendment.
all right on the bill as amended
members of the committee with
any questions.
Mr chairman I know depressants
mended.
So we Soto with the to pass
they're doing are you asking me
recognize with the second yes.
Second all right Emily please
call the roll in a two passed
motion as amended.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Moores.
Sorry wrong button yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you yes.
Yes.
Senator Kernan thank you have a
do pass thank you.
Thank you as amended in this
committee all right thank you
very much thank you committee.
Senator pope are you still with
us.
I am Mr chair will next year
Senate bill two sixty eight
Senator pope.
Senator Hemphill will hear you
after that.
Senator pope.
Hope you know our drill around
here.
You have up to fifteen minutes
give me a second I'll let you
know what we have.
I hope to take less time than
that Mr chair we have a a large
number of individuals who has to
be recognized as proponents
including the state auditor
Brian Cologne and others we have
one register opponent for the
foundation for open government
so Senator pope you'll have up
to fifteen minutes to.
Advocate for your bill and that
will include time for any
experts or proponents we wish to
recognize in yieldcontrolled
fifteen minutes as you wish all
right Sir thank you Mr chair
Senate bill two sixty eight.
What I'd like to do is let our
all state honor brand Cologne in
the room Mr leader ran and Mr
mat bone if they are available
Senate bill two sixty eight.
Import it's important for the
office of state auditor and the
profession of public accounting
here in New Mexico this
legislation is vital in order to
avoid further conflicts with
existing laws rules and
professional standards because
the alignment and apple co
authority is in the public
interest this bill will enable
the office of the state auditor
better accomplish its statutory
duties and ultimately improve
governmental accountability and
transparency in New Mexico.
Proposed changes to the audit
act relating to the audit
reporting requirements and the
confidential audit documentation
which should not be considered
public records of the state
because the documentation is
private controlled or protected
audit documentation is private
by law as property of the
response will serve certificate
holder control as part of an
audit process covered governed
by varying Authority based on
the type of engagement and
procedures and protected by
existing laws rules and
professional standards the lack
of clarity on the non public
nature of audit documentation in
the audit act creates a conflict
with the broad definition of
public records in the upper.
This legislation is critical to
the office of state auditor and
to the profession a public
account the in New Mexico as are
many firms performing audits of
public agencies that this
legislation affects without the
necessary alignment authority
set forth in the bill first
maybe for granted from
performing governmental audits
and many members of the public
would likely be hesitant to
submit their allegations of
waste fraud and abuse.
So me see who was in the room
right now I I would like to give
an opportunity for Mr Karan to
Discuss this bill a little bit.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator pope members the
committee Larry RN's registered
lobbyists in New Mexico
societies CPA's I will be brief
the New Mexico societies work
with the office state auditor
and Center pope on this
legislation what this
legislation does that brings
statute in alignment with what
the current practices and what
is already reflected in the
engagement letters
that audit firms we use with
entities as they're preparing
audits the work papers under the
audit act which would which
would be held by a CPA or an IPA
is consistent with what would be
work product like an attorney
client privilege and so this
brings us in alignment with with
what is also in other areas you
statute and also makes clear
that these are not are
confidential and are not subject
to disclosure under IPRA but it
doesn't do anything to the
underlying records of the public
agency or the actual audit
report once it's been finalized
that is still a public record
thank you Mr chairman and we
urge your support and I can
stand for questions thank you.
And I like to give an
opportunity for state auditor
just a few words.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
thank you for caring this
legislation having listened to
the hearing this afternoon
understanding your time frame
I'll be very very brief although
we do want to make sure that the
attorney general's office also
gets to weigh in I believe we
have a representative here the
legislative liaison so Jerry
will also speak briefly look our
firm overseas about seventy to
eighty independent public
accountants CPA's that do the
vast majority the audits that
eight hundred to a thousand
agreed upon procedures and audit
on an annual basis the CPA's in
our office do a handful of
audits but every CPA who touches
any on it in the state of New
Mexico has to deal with meeting
their professional obligations
duties and standards and in this
particular case.
Making sure that we protect the
work papers is making sure that
they can comply with their
professional standards I have
personally had independent
public accountants who have
CPA's the firmness of look we're
not sure we can do any more work
for the state of New Mexico with
the office of the state auditor
if our work papers are not
protected and that's because of
their professional standards one
of the New Mexico public
accountancy Act and other
obligations that they have to
maintain as a certified public
accountant licensed in New
Mexico they would have to
violate those standards if we
don't protect these work papers
so this provides some clarity
now there is some current
litigation that the committees
maybe aware of about this
particular issue and let me be
very clear those cases are on
appeal because this is a
critical concept regarding the
duties and alignment of our
statutes under the public
accounts the act of these
accounts operate under their
standards these work papers are
protected and we want to make
sure that we're absolutely clear
this legislation there's another
small change that impact the
technological advances in the
office of the state auditor that
allows us to convey our reports
electronically which are all one
hundred percent available to the
public at all times I will tell
you on the seven hundred ninety
eight they have office it's
always exciting to be in front
of our hundred and twelve
legislators this particular
committee chairman so run this
and members it's a true pleasure
as your colleague is an attorney
and someone who's watches
committee's work for many years
I appreciate the committee I
think we're close attention to
this bill it is the one and only
bill that I've advanced since
I've taken the office of the
state auditor and it's because
it's that important this is
critical to us being able to
read meet our mission and our
obligations under statute to
conduct these audits on an
annual basis we respect the
committee's time we appreciate
you giving us this opportunity
and I yield back to Mr chairman
and senator.
And thank you I'd like to allow
some time from for Jerry Mayer's
from the attorney general's
office.
Thank you senator Poe all right
We had the.
A number of other proponents.
Mr chair yes at a time.
No yes Sir I'm sorry so that you
you're at six minutes okay I
wanted to give an opportunity
from for Jerry from the attorney
general's office this week.
Who do we need to let and
Senator are she's already in
Jerry.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator pope and members of the
committee I am very modest I am
the policy analyst with the New
Mexico office of the Attorney
General we support this
legislation and we think Senator
pope and our state auditor Brian
Cologne for bringing this
important legislation thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair a that it's
all the time that we need okay
we have my half a dozen for
folks with the O. SA I assume
they've been Representative
adequately by now on that we
Cordova Jessica a go Stephanie
today is around Muscat an us and
them that cannot all identified
as with the US state Mr Chairman
yes Mr chairman members the
committee if I may I would agree
and I appreciate all my staff
joining me to back me up to make
sure that I'm ready willing and
able to answer all your
questions the committees
committee questions there are
two individuals we've asked to
join that hopefully are on the
list but are somewhat experts in
this area one is professor
Richard Brody from the
university of New Mexico the
department head to speak to this
issue and then only lastly one
of our large practitioners that
is for many years and work with
the office of state auditor Mr
mat bone of CLA accounts you
for.
Senator pope let's see I'm
showing you at about eight
minutes used about seven minutes
left would like to recognize
those two individuals center yes
yes Mr chair so we can go to Mr
Brody first.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator pope my name is
Richard Brody and I am the
Douglas Menge brown professor of
accounting in the Anderson
school at UNM I'm also the
department chair I've been a CPA
for over thirty five years and
have spent over thirty years
teaching students about auditing
the only comment that I would
like to make here is that
protecting the work papers is
one of the hallmarks of the
auditing profession and it
always has been and just to echo
the comments made by auditor
Cologne it is it is critically
important that the work papers
of the auditing profession.
Under the waters and the
auditing profession are remain
a protected and this has always
been the case and other or
significant reasons that this
occurs in addition to of
following the requirements of
the profession thank you for
giving me this opportunity to
speak.
Thank you Mr Brody and now Mr
chair will go with Mr map on.
Thank you senator pope Mister
chair members of the committee
thanks for this to comment today
on Senate bill two C. H. my name
is not known I'm a licensed CPA
in the state of New Mexico I am
with a look at County Fuhrman
have been performing audits of
governmental entities in the
state of New Mexico for almost
fifteen years and I think that
between Sir pro player grant
under Cologne and rich Brody
they did excellent job of
outlining the necessity of
Senate bill two sixty eight in
related changes to the odd Act
and have anything else to add on
top of that but just emphasized
the my support for Senate bill
two sixty eight related changes
so that it does align with the
professional standards.
Public doctors reported on its
in the state of New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair now we owe
the respect on.
Thank you all registered in
opposition is Nancy Henry with
the New Mexico foundation for
open government is miss Henry in
our conference.
Mr chair I don't have Mister
Henry I do have a Melanie majors
to do with the same
our organization would like to
speak in opposition now.
All right miss majors will be
recognized in opposition mis
majors.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee I
am Melanie majors I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government in the fall the New
Mexico Supreme Court limited the
scope of a provision in state
law that she'll certain law
enforcement records from public
disclosure in the ruling the
state's highest court the
inspection of public records act
does not create a blanket
exception from inspection for
law enforcement records related
to an ongoing investigation the
ruling is significant because it
makes clear that an ongoing
investigation is not a basis for
withholding records we believe
what applies to law enforcement
should applaud the state auditor
and therefore oppose this bill
USA box public agencies that's
the public business and it
should be open efra you for your
time and I do hope that you
oppose this all.
Thank you all right we'll go
next to members of the
committee.
Members the committee with
questions.
Committee members with questions
at all.
All right I'm so I see Senator
Baca and then Senator o'neill.
Senator Baca.
yes question on Senator Baca.
Since October right you seem to
have a poor audio connection.
give that a second let's make
sure that all the limit let me
adjust this house as a better
much better go ahead Sir so okay
so I have a question Mr chair on
a new language page two of the
wind eight of which is
confidential audit documentation
including working.
It sounds very general can you
can you tell me a little bit
more about what Mr chair and
senator those or expert what
what does the audit
documentation items are.
Mr chair Senator Baca I would
like to.
For that question to Mr Karan.
Mr chairman I apologize not bone
maybe better to answer your
question.
My apologies on that Mr bone.
Mr chair Senator program so as
far as the with the working
papers it one of our
responsibilities primary spots
we have is expressed an opinion
on the financial statements of
the government can see that we
are adding in New in order to
support the opinion of bills be
expressed we we make with
important documentation and we
we save our audit work papers in
a file and that will certainly
supports the on it we also
expressed that we demonstrates
that we complied with the local
professional standards and more
on the project those are being
retained that regulatory
oversight intimate review those
especially for doing federal
compliance type body work we may
have appeared that those those
files that documentation is
retained the also make those
work papers document our work to
support the opinion that we put
on those financial statements
those work papers are property
of our firm and as outlined in
the professional standards any
confidential client information
we have we are not able to.
Releasing the information
without to specifically at
requesting approval from the
client.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for that answer Mr bone I am I I
understand what the working
papers are those would see more
oriented to me towards.
to pinions I'm not sort of being
confidential audit documentation
that that sounds like
a statement soon and
things of that nature bank
statements what have you that
are submitted.
And it is that what that is what
is a specifically it's just a
very general term to me.
Mr chair Senator Baca.
So
you know the workers that we
retain as part of our audit are
confidential work papers that we
are unable to release without
to.
Approval from the client now if
you're referring to a bank
statement thanks to may become
one of our work papers that is
retained in our audit file but
the bank statement can be you
know a governmental entity is
this available for public
request directly from that
government into that just won't
be able to make those requests
of our work papers that were
there retain that may have
additional audit documentation
on those files.
Public be able to access that.
Mr chair Senator Baca I want to
give an opportunity to our state
order.
Sure they respond as well.
Absolutely thank you Mr chairman
members the committee Senator
Baca I the one thing I want to
just underscore that I think
that Mr bone stated but but I
think it should be
Undervalued which is that
original documentation it's
always available to the public
by way of the governmental
entity those requests can be
made a governmental entity for
those documents but but under
the public accountancy Act which
is current law the work papers
are protected and that loss
certainly lays out what that
information is under those
public accountancy standards and
those obligations that they have
to maintain under their
profession as to confidentiality
and ownership those those
documents are owned by the
governmental entity and they can
be acquired by the governmental
entity I'm also just say that
because I was so brief from my
remarks the other point I want
to make is that they clearly if
there's a situation where you
know the courts are involved and
there's a subpoena involved the
concert always subpoena those
records or documents but the
work product work papers from
the public accounts under their
professional standards they're
not permitted to release that
information they're just simply
not they can redirect them back
to the governmental entity but
under their standards and their
their requirements and I think
Mr bone would would agree with
this and I'm I don't hold the
licenses a CPA but he does as as
my deputy state auditor Nelly
Korda whose present answer any
questions they are unable to
release that information in in
the event we force them to do
that there are many firms like
Clifton Larson Allen is a
substantial amount of work for
office and has for many years
will have to reconsider whether
or not they're able to do that.
If that happens we're in a
constitutional crisis as to my
office is my office as you know
has about thirty six employees
we don't have enough licenses in
our office or a budget to be
able to do the audits so so it
really does put us in in a bind
and it puts us in a bad position
what we're asking CPA's to
violate their license
agreement and standards and and
that's really what this protects
us from doing thank you Mr
Representative may I hope that
answers your question Senator
walk
it does to a certain degree I
guess
my my next question I guess Mr
chair based on the same issue
with the
you you've been operating or the
the office of the state auditor
has been operating without this
for some time
and so it has has lawsuit arisen
out of it what consequence have
you seen other for the I guess
the feeling that you may run
into trouble going forward what
what's the consequence of having
operated under these terms or
not these terms but the terms
prior what you're proposing
what have you seen with the
thank you Mr.
Mr chairman members of the
committee just Senator Baca
excellent question impact indeed
we did have a lawsuit to try and
push the envelope on what we are
required to release under under
intra and and partially what
this does is it provides clarity
it's just like I think I heard
in committee a couple days ago
we talked about being crystal
clear in our statutes about what
is and what isn't because courts
are open to interpretation and
when we leave some are open
interpretation we put things at
risk and so we wanted to bring
this into alignment this
particular statute into
alignment with the public
accountancy Act and the
standards that are required by
the CPA's and their association
and their public standards under
the accounts the act and this is
for all public accounting this
is not a private sector is for
public accountancy Mr bone spoke
to how long he's been in this
particular sector doing public
accounting and so that is in
fact was what prompted us to do
this nobody had ever attempted
to obtain those work papers in
the past and and so that that's
what led us to this we felt like
it had to be crystal clear and
we have to align our our audit
act in an agreement with the
public accountancy Act which is
very clear on what's
confidential and what what's
what's protecting the work
papers.
Thank you Mr chairman members Mr
on what what time thank you Mr
Senator what what type of you
said that there was a lawsuit
initiated one ask you who it was
but what type of of of
plaintiffs initiated the lawsuit
said a member of the public was
it a CPA present who was what
type of claim was it.
Maybe Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Baca it was a
member of the public who is a
tremendous advocate for FY ends
and she was listed as a
proponent was going to speak
today and
Miss Henry brought that suit I
think it was related to the
The the livestock board reason
was the underlying lawsuit and
no final judgment exists in that
case it was an underlying ruling
we are on appeal of the ruling
and we have to be there's not a
single license CPA that I've
found it says that they're
willing to stand and say these
work papers are not protected
under their professional
statutes so
I I think that's that's really
where we're at it's just about
alignment thirty so be sure to
select clarify so the person
that brought the lawsuit of they
were in defense of not releasing
the information is that right is
that what you're saying.
Mr chairman members the
committee document go ahead go
ahead I'm sorry Mr chairman
members the committee Senator
Baca no it was to get us to
release additional information
and work papers.
Thank you members committee
Senator Baca I'm confused a
little bit and Mr chair she was
going to be here today to
advocate for this I would think
that that person would have been
advocating for the protection of
information that was pertinent
to occur rather than the offices
so I have that right no Mr
chairman members the committee
senator Bach I'm sorry I'm not
being clear she brought a
lawsuit to have us release
additional documentation that we
consider to be protected under
the work papers exception and
under the public accounts the
acting in the licensure of all
CPA's in the state of New Mexico
and the public accountancy Act
she brought a lawsuit so that we
would have to release those
papers we have an underlying
ruling in a case that has not
been concluded it says that we
are supposed to release we're
appealing that ruling the the
other thing is just to be clear
I think where part of the
confusion was she signed up in
opposition of the bill.
Mr chair members the committee
Senator Baca I hope that answers
your question it does thank you
confuse me that she would have
been an advocate for this bill
thank you.
I think that's all I have Mister
chair thank you for your answers
to the.
Senator Baca.
other committee members a
question Senator o'neill I do
next.
Thank you Mr chair members and
VRA.
move it do pass on Senate bill
two sixty eight.
The committee members with
questions.
I'm I have just one before we go
to the vote Center pope this is
so for you although you may want
to refer to somebody else the
the bill protects
with new language on page two
one eight Center Baca's us
earlier but confidential audit
documentation I heard some
explanation of what that would
involve is there any the
definition for what this is
really for anyone to help you
with is there any any definition
or common understanding of what
is confidential audit
documentation is there is there
any question about what that
would include.
Mr chair I like to defer that to
Mr bone.
Mr chair members of the
committee Center cope any.
I work paper any documentation
that we need nearly as part of
our RD would be confidential.
What I know that Mr brown if I
we've always a litigating this
and I was suing you in court for
those records and you said this
is confidential the legislature
has said that it's.
With the what would become
legislature said that I'm
protected for whatever is
confidential audit documentation
you're gonna say these papers
are confidential audit
documentation how you can argue
that to the court these
documents are confidential audit
documentation.
Mr chairman members of the
committee senator
I guess as as far as that you in
this this is back to what under
Cologne stated that you know as
part of our audit we accumulates
various documents request from
governmental entities those
documents that the government
only has are available four
hundred to make a public request
of the of those documents that
we accumulate we pull from that
in documentation that we put in
our file thank you for following
the professional standards are
confidential documents anything
that is in our file those are
property all those documents
that we seem like we make copies
in our file become property of
our firm doesn't mean the
original documents are.
now is the other co stated
earlier any of the audit
documentation our workers are
you through subpoena would be
available for
you send any any type of
lawsuit.
Thank you.
I like to give our state auditor
opportunity as well to answer.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman members
the committee I would just say
that under the A. I. CPA the
professional standards under
autumn audit documentation we
got I've got the sites your
paragraph point zero six of the
eight U. S. C. section three
thirty nine confidence audit
documentation includes
correspondence including email
concerning significant findings
or issues schedules of the work
performed analysis issues
memoranda and summaries
summaries of significant
findings or issues or letters of
confirmation so we do have a
definition of the professional
standards and I think that I
hope that it's your question
Senator Mr chairman and members
the committee doesn't thank you
Mr well my friend.
Should a good definition act
fortunately for you I think that
only because we sum greater
pause for what what may be or
should be available to the
public or not including things
like email and so forth in my in
my law practice these days it
may not surprise you email is I
I tell my kids and also so don't
put anything in your email or
text messages because.
In the end you'd be surprised
how much information ultimately
comes back to to folks that way
some thank you for the answer to
my question wanted to pass
motion by Senator o'neal.
Any other questions or comments
from committee members Emily
would you take a roll call on
the do ask motion please.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Hello yes ma'am.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
Hello yes.
Senator Baca.
This and I'm sorry did you get
did you get everyone did you get
a pirtle vote.
Yes Sir right now my goal is no
lost track of the count
normally.
Yes.
I think Senator Baca is back.
You.
Four no three yes right so we
have failing to do past motion
is that right no that's correct.
Senator pope well we have not
passed the bill the bill will
remain the committee for now all
right.
Thank you all right committee
members let me tell you my
intentions.
And so just about five o'clock.
I tell you we would want to
break for dinner my plan is to
do that now and to resume the
committee after the floor with
four bill still on our agenda
for today beginning with Senator
Hemphill on Senate one ninety
Senator Hemphill I hope you got
word we we we called earlier I'm
sure you were busy with another
Canadian but we moved over yours
will take yours first up when we
resume will also here Senate
bill one I'm sorry Santo forty
eight election changes and
Senate joint resolution for
review of salaries as well as
Senate bill one nineteen enter
your sexual come back let me
tell you my plans to hear all of
those after the floor session
but however that will be
dependent on what time we get
off the floor session if we have
we finish the time up early will
trying here's some additional
bills tonight if not we'll put
them at the top of our list for
Wednesday with that unless
there's objection will stand in
recess that the call of the
chair and subject to the ending
time on the floor session this
evening.
Everybody go get a break we got
in our.
