So Senator house bill two oh
seven spend Human Rights Act
scope of for those of you
Senator Hamblen probably newer
to the committee I guess so what
we have we have folks registered
require them to register in
advance we've got no opponents
on the bill so that means that
I'm gonna be pretty quickly with
the proponents we allow folks to
put together an organized
presentations at which all have
today okay so we do that is it
gonna include Mexico coalition
sexual assault providers
conservation voters ACLU Planned
Parenthood he quality New Mexico
is that all of them in the
presentation.
Which of the three five Mr chair
conservation voters and the
ceiling.
Okay so that means that I've got
outside the scope of coordinated
presentation of New Mexico
allusion of sexual assault and a
quality New Mexico so what I'm
gonna do is is that they want to
be recognized as a Richard Vance
I'll give you the one minute
otherwise the remaining that's
two members with one minute the
others right minute lost you as
you wish to do it you present it
you cut people off you let him
as much snow as much time as you
want okay all right here on this
chair committee thank you very
much for hearing this this bill
Mr chair committee I've lived in
New Mexico for thirty years
which is more than any other
place in my adult life I grew up
in el Paso Texas it is someone
who is learning my truth getting
comfortable and accepting who I
was when the societal rhetoric
was anything but I decided to
move to New Mexico because I
knew the state was different as
residents we know we are part of
the magic of a truly
multicultural multiracial
incredibly diverse state we are
strong people with values of
community family and respect for
each other's differences and I
believe these are some of the
reasons why we've had such a
strong and powerful Human Rights
Act or non discrimination law in
our state for so long in fact we
were only the third state in the
country to add gender identity
to our law protecting our trans
siblings across New Mexico I'm
honored to be able to present
this to be a co presenter with
this with Representative Ortez
and I'll let her go ahead and
continue on with the our
discussion today thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
this is what the bill does we
update it definitions for sexual
orientation and gender identity
we update discriminatory
language for the disability
community we add definitions for
sex and gender the bill insurers
that public dollars cannot be
used to discriminate and we
ensure that public entities are
held to the same standard as
private ones the bill does not
determine whether or not an
individual or governmental
entity is discriminating it
allows access for individuals to
bring their cases to the Human
Rights Commission and that it
does not hold individuals
accountable it holds public
bodies and institutions
accountable.
So on that note Mr chair we have
our experts here today Marshall
Martinez who's the executive
director of equality New Mexico
the more **** was a local
attorney based out of Santa Fe
and at this point Mr chair we
look forward to the discussion
and also public testimony period
and did you want to recognize
conservation voters ACLU or
Planned Parenthood I would like
to let them all go ahead and
come up Mr chair let's go for
ACLU first Mr chair the party
presentation so you're under
eight minutes so find much time
as you want for you one of those
three groups.
Mr chair while they're getting
that may go ahead and have the
other two groups stand in line.
Or public commentary those that
are not part of your organized
presentation yes that we can get
on the list Mr chair the other
two were to coalition of sexual
assault providers they here for
the here.
I don't see way for the sure
they can make a quality New
Mexico obviously here so your
you're on so.
And recognize conservation ACLU
and Planned Parenthood as you
write fiction it's still you I
care if you please would be part
of this.
Presentation thank you.
It's that old.
Good afternoon yes about this
and members of the committee my
name is a total cost to you and
I'm the political and policy
associate with conservation
voters New Mexico more
importantly I'm a queer non
binary first generation Mexican
who grew up in the south valley
of Albuquerque.
Throughout my schooling I never
felt I never once felt safe in
an academic setting coming out
about my mixed immigration
status family or about myself as
a queer person I was not able to
fully truly embrace who I was
until I graduated high school
and attended college out of the
state I felt I would be put
through hell if anyone ever knew
who I truly was or the rest of
my family for that matter this
deeply hurt my soul so much so
that I began to have suicidal
thoughts and suicidal ideation.
If it was not for my sister I
would not be standing in this
room in front of you right now.
No I hear others like me you're
living in fear because of how
we're being attacked across the
nation it's like me must be
protected loss like the H. R. A.
must include all aspects of my
identity if I experience this
commission a public institution
because I'm not the new or
Mexican I would be protected but
only under federal law if
experiences commission because
I'm queer non binary I would
have no protections under
current state or federal law.
That's why we must fix a
loophole we cannot legislate.
Protections for all young people
that and to depression stigma or
suicidal ideations but we can
insure in this political
environment that those charged
with educating and protecting
young people do so for LGBTQ
youth everywhere in New Mexico
from the bottom of my heart I
urge you to please support and
pass HB to a seven thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members my name is Austin we I
can the indigenous justice
policy advocate with the city of
New Mexico and I stand today in
strong support of house bill two
of seven because it's a good
common sense piece of
legislation to close a loophole
which would have allowed the
state to discriminate against
LGBTQ neighbors friends and
family we believe this is a
strong bill that will promote
true equity for all are
protected classes in New Mexico
and provide more expedient and
local path to justice for those
who have their civil rights
violated in the state thank you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Kayla
herring with Planned Parenthood
votes New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of this bill and
it is very close to my heart
when my sibling was twelve years
old they came out to me is trans
and understanding the harsh
realities that queer and trans
youth face in New Mexico and
across the country and the very
high rates of suicidal ideation
and attempts my number one job
in life became affirming their
identity making them happy and
keeping them safe.
Throughout their schooling we
faced numerous adverse
experiences that made that job a
lot harder and we had no option
for requires to ensure that that
would stop happening beyond one
teacher in their high school who
needed a priority as well as
money to ensure that any
thoughts of a of suicide would
never come to pass and I'm so
lucky that my sibling is still
here today we urge you to vote
for it house bill two oh seven
to give queer and trans youth an
opportunity to live happy
healthy and safe lives thank you
to thank you please ratios
center of your no opposition
members the committee.
The one Senator Wirth.
Affects the motion by due to
pass for
Senator doing surveys so
anything on the bill hi question
this.
the testimony that was blocked
off by.
our current law.
What was that.
We just expect to the to the
people of actual procedure.
Absolutely Mr chair and and and
then Senator Ivy Soto up part of
this is is making sure that the
language is updated because as
we've known from many years when
I first came out it was you were
lesbian or gay now we've got
this full spread spectrum we
want to make sure that those
definitions are something that
can stand the test of time and
so that is why we're bringing
this is an update yes we do have
those protections but we want to
make sure that we're talking
about gender identity and sexual
orientation and gender Mr chair
Senator we are also adding
political subdivisions under the
Human Rights Act which was not
in it before which means
you it entities of the state and
public contractors well Mr chair
Senator.
I'm.
Okay that's what I.
Political subdivisions were
already in there.
Other entities and one of.
Yes Mr chair and senator public
bodies we're not in the previous
version of the Human Rights Act.
Thank thank you.
Those are just like to remark
it's you you all the younger
people the twenty years ago I
guess once when we look at their
store number this when we added
sexual orientation to Human
Rights Act on the floor of the
house news hours of debate and
lot of discussion because we
couldn't decide whether the
property planning which was
sexual orientation in a very
long to make discussion
Representative Martinez and nine
others bunch lawyers trying to
debate the inclusion of that
language is a big deal two years
ago now this seems pretty self
evident so congratulations to
progress anyone else the
committee I want to do passed
motion of center to is there any
objection saying then show
senator Wirth Center syringes to
Hey Neil Stewart and Ivey Soto
that would be passed there have.
Anyone here in Chandler.
Chandler but if.
Senator how to me you hear for
the the last film
this bill right are committing
it to speak.
Came in a little.
USA then.
Just the bill is important for
the LGBTQ plus community and I'm
very thankful to pass thank you
good to have you with us
chairman nobody Padilla.
Spence key returners storage
anyone I'm sorry thing is
coming through the state
secretary of state.
Our classroom trying to trying
to work through my list no do if
an offense Cadena.
Four to thirty seven no.
Hopefully be hill also seventy
nine no.
All right you got it senator
Graham for one thirty one.
Thank you Mr chairman we are
here I have my expert witness
and members of the committee
Kyle staff who just returned
okay and I have Sanchez.
Representative Thompson here and
I just wanted to recognize Kyle
who just returned from his very
first comp world international
try out the line where he placed
fourth so he it was so important
for him to be here he just flew
in today to three want to
congratulate him and I'll give
my Representative the the main
house Representative an
opportunity to speak but
basically what this bill does
it's the house floor substitute
for house bill one thirty one
and it addresses the main issues
that prevent coverage insurance
coverage for in people who are
insured from getting a
prosthetic or a and.
Or that for for the first
produktivnost covered by
insurance and not is insurance
caps and also denying the
medical necessity of the device
and I will turn it over to the
house sponsor to say if you
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee so it kind of came
to me in the summer idea and so
he has built a great coalition
basically what this bill does it
state you can't discriminate
against someone if you have two
limbs and you need a total knee
replacement to get back to your
previous level of activity
there's no issue if you have an
amputation and you need a
specific prosthesis to get you
back to your previous activity
level they just say no so we're
just making it fair and there's
something called I don't want to
get too deep in the woods called
the frail under the affordable
Care Act we're if you mandate
new coverages the state has to
pitch in for that and we work
closely with the office of
superintendent of insurance to
to make it so that it's not
discriminatory rather than
mandating that they cover these
activity prosthesis in our
politics that they do not
discriminate if you have a limb
loss or limb difference so with
that thank you Mr chair.
You.
And Mister chair if it's okay
with you all let hello my expert
witness say a few words Mr chair
and committee members Mr is
great to see you again
as many as you all know of heard
my story I was diagnosed with
osteosarcoma in two thousand
eight which is a rare bone
cancer I was given a twenty
percent chance to live and when
through fourteen rounds of
chemotherapy fourteen surgeries
and ninety eight rounds of
chemotherapy for twelve years I
entered chronic pain and in two
thousand twenty I was in a
downhill mountain bike accident
that resulted in my left leg
being amputated above the knee.
I was scared deeply deeply
scared in order to get my
opportunities and my life back
all I wanted to do was be like
my friends was to run to play
sports and be physically active
but unfortunately the views of
medical necessity for entities
is that if you want to be
physically active you need a
secondary device but the
secondary device is not
medically necessary to the eyes
of insurance and tell this bills
being passed which is we have
unanimous support from both
Presbyterian as well as Blue
Cross blue shield to passes
legislation to create access to
prosthetics orthotics for
physical activity and ensuring
that we have insurance fairness
so do this legislation will lead
the nation I'm incredibly
coverage and access to what is
medically necessary that we
already provide coverage and
access for individuals that are
non disabled to get recover to
their full mobility.
And Mr chairman I'll just add
one additional piece the reason
it was so important to me my son
had osteosarcoma when he was
four years old just like tile he
had a left leg amputation about
a year later he was fitted for a
prosthetic device that
prosthetic device weighed almost
as much as he did he was not
able to ever use it to walk he
could stand on it it was number
of functional device for him and
his only wish he just turned
twenty eight this Saturday his
wish was to be able to run with
his peers at school but he was
never able to obtain not.
We have the best expert
witnesses Calloway and hope I
don't know if they're listening
but both of them that's their
wish to for children across New
Mexico to be able to have not
just a prosthetic device but a
prosthetic device that is
functional worth of for an OPS
you can never
board or thought it could that
allows them to obtain the level
of functioning that they had
before their accident or injury
or the level of functioning that
their peers have so that they
can continue to play and
interact with their peers just
like a typical child or an adult
so thank you Mr chairman we
stand for questions thank you we
have the one registered shares
for opposition so we have
proponents trial you've already
been identified
B. Elaine Mathis are you here.
She's on to zoom.
You got is here.
The New Mexico for.
You.
The rebels yes.
There's no.
Of the Alain Mathis is
recognized for one minute on
June.
hi my name is B. L. A. Mathis
can you hear me yes we can you
recognize what one minute
please.
I'm a below the knee amputee an
explanation the field of
orthopedics and prosthetics
serving the New Mexico community
and I'm testifying favor of
house bill one thirty one and
two thousand eleven I had a rock
climbing accident became any
enmity I knew then what I want
to be whatever I wanted to
become a clinician and work in
rural areas to fight for
individuals in need after years
of being an amputee I'm still
trying to figure out what works
for you checked or activity
there's not a single prosthetic
design that fits at all and each
activity requires a very
prosthetic design my insurance
company wouldn't cover the cost
items were donated to use all
parts and pieces to build
activity specific prosthetic
devices without the appropriate
prosthesis can be left listers
and skin breakdown the majority
of the population I serve have
court miss morbidity such as
diabetes and that can delay
healing small blister family to
a large the hospital status my
pediatric population I just want
to get up and play tag with
their peers on the playground my
patients already find it
challenging to get by and not
having access to activity
specifically to come to a
greater cost to the individual
and insurance companies there
should be a dollar sign attached
to the pathway of healthy living
there's no one like for
everything there's no one like
for like you can be part of
making a difference and you can
be part of mobility for all
please testified in favor for
house bill one thirty one thank
you for your time thank you miss
Mathis also have Leri around
here up to one minute.
Thank you Mr chairman of this
committee Larry hearing
registered lobbyists for
president health plan Mexico
already stole my thunder let you
know that press Virginia
supportive of this legislation
we also appreciate that they
made a couple changes to make it
more clear what we're covering
but this truly is an equity
issue and this is a good piece
of legislation and we're proud
to be the first insurance
company to endorsed a bill like
this thank you Mr chairman you
Mr and Nicole but when you're
recognized appointment by zoom.
Hello.
Good afternoon my name is Nicole
over Kailyn American or chronic
lymphocytic Association and we
support each the one three one
through my work I had the access
challenges of over twenty eight
clinics in New Mexico and their
ability to provide appropriate
care to their patients like my
own struggle as a survivor of
Nassar's Acoma and eighty eight
can you share with me the pain
of wanting to find a child
access to running prosthesis to
be a kid again the building
faces analysis every turn they
witness firsthand families being
faced with prohibitive out of
pocket costs patients risking
harm injury trying to be
physically active on an adequate
devices and even patients
acquired secondary health
conditions like diabetes obesity
and heart disease for for
sanitary lifestyle we're seeing
enormous amounts of burnout and
moral injury practitioners to
struggle to uphold their
commitment to healing within a
dysfunctional health care system
today we can help fix that
legislative practitioners the
ability to do their job and
providing patients the mobility
of the State please support one
three one thank you thank you Mr
chairman of that completes our
advocacy there's no opposition
as I said members the committee
pleasure action.
So do is made a very quiet
motion for the past when I heard
the news.
Whispered.
Other committee question Sir
Moores thank.
just want to go to the R. was
request your employer support as
well actually pay the bills one
of their submitted on time
usually make sure that the
waters of the service on the non
duly of pressure to go out of
business.
Mr Chairman Senator Moores yes.
All what are forty five days.
The committee question input to
do pass motion.
Anyone else is there any
objection to do past motion.
Show some remorse Senator Baca
center were to serve on this
Duhigg o'neill Stewart maybe
Soto in the affirmative be able
to pass Representative thank you
members of the committee
congratulations again Senator
okay so I know just before we
got started we've got a hard
stop time in an hour that means
I'm wielding a pretty heavy
gavel means expecting folks to
stay within the time limitations
so next up you all are taking
this taking the stage which one
are you assuming we're gonna
hear next.
Mr chair
Senator Wirth indicated that we
may hear H. B. one sixty in a
and I'm sorry to disappoint you
but let me change the order just
a little bit here we're going to
hear first of all.
H. B. one eighty please that'll
just be pretty quick I think
some of these I'm doing in the
in the order of but I think
we'll get through to the agenda
more quickly so Representative
welcomes thank you Mr chair to
one eighty let me just tell you
first of all Representative the
practice of this committee you
may not be here love this maybe
your first first time here I
thought it was your first time
here so I do things a little
differently over here but we try
and set aside blocks time rather
than the numbers of individuals
there's no opposition this bill
who's registered events to speak
in advance there is one
proponent and Davis is register
speak in support given the lack
of opposition in the time
limitations I'm gonna ask you to
keep your advocacy to five
minutes you can do whatever you
want to do with it all right.
Members of the committee house
bill one eighty basically
immense public record laws to
authorized public records to be
stored electronically and
maintained in a digital format
and I have with me just because
Center Haynes who is the chief
technology officer for the
judiciary with that I would
stand for questions.
Would you like to make a comment
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee representative at
the bill is as straightforward
as it seems we are seeking a
modern alternative to properly
care for public records today
the statute requires that be
done with paper or microphone
electronic records would be
vastly more versatile secure and
more lasting.
And as I said Richard in support
in advance of the hearing was
Ben Davis.
Here.
No that's a scratch.
Members of the committee no
opposition house bill one eighty
currently sort of.
Sorry.
Issue with the.
Representative runs
this.
In response to.
I feel.
That.
On.
I.
This is.
What is.
Mr chairman if that they might
take a stab at just fifteen to
one of the things that has come
up in the discussion around this
bill is the degradation of
microfiche over time and I would
love for my needs to add to that
please Mr chair members of the
committee thank you
Representative that is
absolutely correct my confused
as to greater over time and
technology has advanced
considerably in the years
intervening Center conversation
and the fact that the commission
for public records submitted an
analysis generally supportive of
this change the knowledge in
that paper takes a great deal of
space electronic records allow
more flexibility in that regard
as well.
And the Mr chairman and.
Yeah.
Is our reserve officers sent
forces the apple or other
important matter for Mr chair
members of the committee is not
necessarily as on the the format
is easily accessible.
Part of the staff to to make our
public records available if
needed.
Thank you so so much Madam
chair representative
what sorts are archival.
Bills.
What was secretary for.
For instance for that Mr chair
members of the committee this
applies to public records which
cover a large variety of
materials from meeting minutes
to something more esoteric
if there is value in the paper
the owner of the record could
choose to keep it that way much
of our public records are things
like meeting minutes and having
electronic copies that can be
easily managed in index and made
available to the public would be
a much faster retrieval system
as well.
Mr scripts sent by a group use
passerby's more community high
level things issue the state for
hundreds of years potential.
just look at us lawyers look at
Landy three four years ago the
store was intrinsic value for
historical operations are to
have that paper record of
communal microfiche deteriorates
faster with your responses of
getting along.
I would be very cautious of
doing this in the ruin of
historical off options for
fifty.
Now we're looking back at the
so.
Senator.
We use our communal.
This is a motion for new
passcode from Santo Ivey Soto is
there any objections the defense
motion show some remorse and
Baca in opposition and support
shows are worth Cervantes to
hate the meal Stewart and every
so we have a two passed and
before you go Representative
looking to see about one two
three seven four of that for you
know four five six seven house
members I would just like to
take the opportunity to let you
all know the Senate judiciary
committee's hearings House Bills
or working on the very
efficiently and I would like to
see the same consideration the
house occasionally so we've got
a Senate bill in particular of
interest to the Chief Justice
reporters in the front row
Senate Bill number two it's been
sitting there for three or four
days has moved it all of you all
the house will ask for things to
move a little more efficiently
for apps on the house side
effects thank you Mr chairman
we're delighted that you're
hearing are built in and we'll
be definitely take a close look
at that thank you good thank you
very much for that spirit of
cooperation we're all about that
back to house bill one sixty
search broadband infrastructure
the need to cut you off earlier
Mr.
Thank you Mr chair at eighty one
sixty authorizes the state
mission for two or three
iterations of I.
Mr chair and Representative
Christina worked I am.
Pretending for Representative
Chandler.
This thank you and it was sixty
authorizes the state
transportation commission to
prescribed conditions for the
installation of fiber cable
lines conduit poll wireless
technology and on other
infrastructure used for
broadband internet services
along the cross over or under
public highways or other
property under the under the
jurisdiction of it and then D.
O. T. it also gives the state
transportation commission the
discretion to waive the fees for
the installation of
infrastructure that is used to
provide broadband internet
services to the underserved or
to the unserved or underserved
locations as defined in the
connect New Mexico act Mr chair
I do not have of an expert with
me but I believe that senator
Wirth is
Also in favor of this bill and
can support me as I do this.
It's still phone a friend.
So provided both of you know
there's nobody registered in
opposition this legislation and
so you can tailor your remarks
accordingly so we're jealous of
you thank you want to have their
members the committee on house
bill one sixty four as a
committee substitute whether by
the way for that one.
Hello to.
This.
We do have state for the
discussion.
Service for the past motion
show none senator Morris Baca
president were surveillance is
to echo Neil Stewart and every
Soto in the affirmative you have
to pass.
Representative.
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety seven.
Mr chair committee just and
Representative Lara Cadena.
Spend a few of the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to ninety seven
this committee so does three
important things first of all
the times to come help in New
Mexico corrections department to
engage in rulemaking process as
of today's date they've never
gone to rulemaking like many of
our state agencies including
when we instructed them to is
part of legislative intent
secondly it establishes a
bipartisan corrections advisory
board and finally allows this
advisory board to hire numbers
person
I am proud to be here today with
my friend and colleague Barron
Jones and I'm proud that over
many months and years I've been
able to build a working
relationship with the secretary
I'm grateful to have learned
from her insight made tangible
amendments to this bill that
resulted in the house Judiciary
Committee substitute I know that
potentially they're still work
moving forward to make sure that
this is something that has
pragmatic and practical sense
for the department finally I'll
wrap by saying this is about
objective review it's my.
That if the state has the
authority to lock people up that
we as policymakers alongside the
department have to be
accountable to that at thirty of
this objective advisory board is
designed to keep an eye out for
compliance whether that's
policies and procedures that the
agency and access them selves
for state and federal law it's
designed to look at the efficacy
of programs within the
corrections department and then
finally does two important
things is designed to watch for
the health safety and welfare of
those under the supervision of
the New Mexico corrections and
just as importantly to be
attentive to the health safety
welfare and working conditions
of those
working within the corrections
agency every single day from our
communities so with that Mr
chair and committee we're ready
for questions.
Which
would see secretary of our for
secretary Schardin the winner.
One of the only reachable if
Berman she's going to.
Mr chair we've asked our
supporters from across the state
to not not doing in an engaging
public comment today in.
I am showing no other proponents
and.
No it's only secretary Lou Cerro
secular zero
recognizable to two minutes.
Good afternoon senator Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for allowing me the
opportunity to speak today first
I'll just say that I really
appreciated working with
Representative cut and that
throughout this process and also
meeting with Mister Jones we've
had some very important
conversations and I believe that
we've made some progress in the
substitute they did make several
changes to address some of the
concerns that we brought to them
but at this point there still
remains to be a number of
security concerns that we think
would jeopardize the day today
operations of the facility and
would likely lead to over time
some higher costs that weren't
addressed in the the budget bill
one of my primary concerns
though is on the make up of the
board and I want to just be
acknowledged that that should
the representative did make some
modifications to that we had
asked for representation from
victim advocates and in the
substitute that you all have in
front of you there the person
who is allowed to be
participating on the board who
is a of a victim of a crime a
person who's been affected can
not essentially be somebody who
has been affected by sexual
assault or by murder because
they cannot be have any kind of
a the person who affected them
could not be incarcerated at
this time and so of course many
of the people who are in prison
right now for sex offenses are
on that five to twenty pearl
supervision term and have longer
sentences in the same would hold
true for people who are
convicted of first degree murder
so many of those people are
excluded from the process we
also believe that that they're
they're still under read
Representative on the make up of
the board there are a variety of
other concerns that relate to
the existing collective
bargaining agreement and the
rules and processes that
currently exist for it it
brought hip and also there are
some concerns that we believe
that this will have some
interference with the rules of
discovery and also that there
are.
Some financial it is interest
issues potential for the
ombudsman and their staff
members who are hired by the
ombudsman but not appointed by
the board or by any of the
appointing bodies so I believe
there's still some work to do
and as this bill moves to the
process I will just look forward
to continuing the productive
work that we are making with the
sponsor thank you so much for
letting me speak and with that I
stand in respectful opposition.
The average seeing opposition.
Just out of curiosity I I
session one else regional
positions that correct anyways
here.
I just kind of curious
is actually this is anybody here
Representative travelers
cessation.
Okay speakers about the
immunities section which seems
to be escaping the lawyers these
days.
members the committee Senator
o'neill thank you Sir for.
For I'm just curious what kind
of power with.
Have.
Just talked to.
And with thank you Mr chairman
Senator o'neill one of the
critiques we've heard especially
from advocates is that this bill
does not go far enough because
it does of course have no
enforceability
imagined and crafted by the
board to be a bipartisan board
with expertise including someone
that has previous correctional
administrative experience
correctional security experience
people been incarcerated
behavioral health medical health
professionals and more all folks
at correctional experience to
come as a collaborative effort
in support of and hopefully one
day alongside the corrections
department so their primary
responsibility is to be the body
that hires the ombudsperson
together and then to hold
meetings with them but person
comes back after receiving
complaints in completing
investigations with those key
findings the let's person in our
design is not to be the one to
turn political and offer
recommendations are go try to
make something happen but
instead just to collect
information and the objective
wait bring it to that advisory
board that may not shall if
appropriate offer
recommendations might be
administrative legislative or
otherwise but really it's about
convening a group of people that
have significant expertise in
corrections so that they can
have a response and smart
conversation about key findings
that come out of these
investigations.
How with that Mr chair
interface with your.
Our.
Maintenance in the actual.
Mr chair and representative
Senator we indicated that this
advisory board would create an
annual report that would be
shared with the appointing
bodies and also the appropriate
legislative interim committees
like CCJ there would not be any
official engagement otherwise
but hopefully it it's a it's a
closely knit highly skilled with
lots of expertise board that
would meet for a period of four
years with staggered terms to
actually have the long term
conversations about what kind of
resources and investment this
department needs so it's
certainly not designed to be
like oh we cast we we caught you
are trying to find something
they did wrong but really and in
the long run hopefully be in
alignment to advocate for the
kind of budget the department
needs the kind of staffing they
need X. that are.
Thank you Mr.
This is for.
This is
logic board Mr chair Senator we
went back and forth with
stipulating their meeting
requirements for now it's as
needed it's an eleven person
board full members of being
appointed in a bipartisan way
split between the majority and
minority from eight council than
the governor has appointments
the sentencing commission has an
appointment that you did that
judiciary has an appointment and
then the office of the public
defenders have a C. as well
also I regret madam I forgot to
mention that you have to
A point appointments as well the
union representing the people
that work in the corrections
department and the students of
or on behalf of their workers in
previous committees and are
still supportive today.
You
know the committee members
questions there Moores
researcher I knows is a
ministry.
In order.
Appropriations of chances.
so we need to.
Right.
Mr Kirk uh they did that and
House Appropriations.
So this approach to that yes are
the members I'm so happy.
So what we're.
our members are opposed to.
Mr chair I'm looking at the
amendments in contact and
instructed that from the title
and it says a KFC.
Keep their money because the
house of.
Mr on.
Comments about the sectors of
comments about not have in the
system subject to others on this
why are we not including our.
Our health.
Including.
Mr chair says senator Morris we
did actually and I really
appreciate the secretary.
incredible staff and victim
services that had that catch we
did ask someone to be appointed
by the IOC that someone is a
victim.
In line with the rest of
conflict of interest that
position just like the rest
means that they can not have
been a victim of an offender
that's currently under the
supervision of the department so
the secretary is rightfully
clarifying is that likely that
would mean they were not the
victim of of first degree murder
or a sexual offender conviction
because those folks are likely
still in prison so it is
possible that someone has
already been there their
judgment sentences close and
then they could serve on that
board otherwise it's victims
that again the the offender the
perpetrator is no longer under
the supervision and because
people will be able to see the
results of complaints and
investigations we wanted to make
sure there was a separation
between people that were part of
the same situation our prime.
Those are all on board.
Looking at some.
Thank you Sir do.
Thank you Mr chair I'm looking
at.
Hey.
Well section yes.
and okay maybe it's a contacts
that that's page twenty twenty
one.
Why are you just following state
rules act this is about the rule
making and you're saying you're
lacing your before they die off
the rules forty five days public
comment and why are we have a
state rules that that lays out
what agencies need to do for
rulemaking so why are we not
just sticking with that Mr chair
and senator as I stated in my
introduction the corrections
department and much for many
years and decades preceding the
secretary we have now has never
gone to a rulemaking process so
they were always supposed to get
us and never have when we took
it upon ourselves to imagine
what it would mean like to
engage in a rulemaking process
that also reflected the
situation of people impacted by
the department and for instance
people that we're currently in
incarceration we thought it was
reasonable to extend that beyond
the state real standards to a
forty five day period for
instance for public comment
because of the barriers to
communication people that are
incarcerated that are
incarcerated face so in order to
give them sufficient time to see
the notification respond by mail
we wanted to make sure that we
were keeping them out of that
process the impact them
directly.
Mr chair representative by that
makes sense I I do want to know
if those nothing in here.
If I mean they already have the
the language that they shall
adopt rules
already none of these changes
are going to make them adopt
rules
Mr chair and senator said that
from the beginning this is an
attempt to compel them the
agency to go to rulemaking
process and potentially this
conversation out loud in front
of us is the legislative body
spurs that action.
Mr chair representative I think
that's more likely than changing
this languages yes to make that
happen and and I I I appreciate
that secretary being here and
and and the you should be making
that is something that should be
happening
I also have like Mr chair
indicated earlier section seven
civil immunity what is the
intention.
Mr chair and senator we've been
waiting to get in front of you
this is language that came from
our drafters and Legislative
Council and the conversation was
that of course folks that are
doing their meeting their
responsibilities in good faith
would be offered this kind of
immunity for that service Mr
chair having them unity put it
is just a standard thing.
Doesn't sit well with me
immunity it should be at
something that is only raises an
exceptional circumstances not as
a matter of course so I would
move to strike section seven yes
the motion properly before the
committee discussion on the
amendment for small yes your
response.
I would consider that a friendly
amendment.
Very friendly maybe committee
members questions discussion on
the stricken section seven
twenty objection to strike in
section seven section seven
Senator Moores Mark record.
In fact
well they're not even here so.
Some
of the show in support of the
amendment etcetera Ivey Soto
Stuart o'neill to again serve on
this section seven has been
struck by amendment Senator use
of the floor very followed by
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
chair I'm looking at section
four sub be.
Where this is talking about the
board and and you lay out and in
the census these would be
bipartisan appointments because
the pointers I hires and indeed
you lay out a whole lot of
things that should be considered
about members about their gender
geographic location.
Race and ethnicity sexual
orientation you don't say
anything about the political
party is there any desire to
ensure a balance of political
parties on this board admire one
of.
D. chair and senator we felt
that the less we came up with so
far was a reflection of our
values and making sure that
people of different geographic
diversity and identities I have
a shot at becoming part of this
board but in our committees with
House Judiciary it felt most
important I think it was
chairman claim that said trying
to get appointing bodies to
coordinate is like herding cats
and as we said out loud we don't
want to fall into another
situation like with the PRC
nominating committee and the
pitfalls and that so instead we
assign to these different rules
of stakeholder expertise to
different appointing bodies and
we felt that
that would suffice because our
our deeper conversation was
about making sure we had that
range of expertise and less so
the political and partisan.
Mr chair so that.
The vast majority of of the bill
to come before us we're we're
set now point like this that's
usually something that we do
include.
That said I if if that's
something that's going to it in
some cases that precludes being
able to get the people with the
expertise on their and what I'm
hearing is that this might be
one of the situations I don't
I'm not going to make a motion I
was just wondering why that
wasn't in the past that's a
little.
This.
why.
Yes Representative.
Asked about the rules also
recognize.
State rules act.
As
part of the problem will.
this we take care of that.
And so right.
Procedures.
I do have.
The board.
You.
What is important to do.
It's awful.
Mr chair and senator in our
conversations like if that we've
gone back and forth about
whether or not that should be
stipulated here
Once this.
Order was established.
And eventually higher numbers
person as you can tell much of
the
if it is moving forward will be
making public that they are to
receive complaints and
investigations with a fair
amount of authority to be with
within corrections facilities
and we often talk about prisons
with those those under
supervision creation.
so when someone files a
complaint reserves the
investigation is done key I
captured we have a process here
that outlines with written
notification and consent from
the person subject to the
investigation whether they'd
like that to be passed on in
full to the Department
potentially for some resolution
for would like that passed on
with redacted information but
those key findings will all go
back to this advisory board so
much of their meetings in their
business would be to have those
long term conversations about
trends they're seeing about
concerns that haven't been
addressed about funding that the
agency has been advocating for a
never received but really to
staff what they're learning in
that objective way so that they
can categorize address and
potentially the a collaborator a
partner in trying to work toward
solutions that are coming up in
these investigations C. after
session for.
I don't see a lot of talk about
four.
The office for six.
So that.
Frankly.
Makes you wonder do we need yes.
Or is just somebody who maybe
could be put under the
sentencing commission.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto we've
heard lots of conversations and
what we said and House Judiciary
is that this was a hands and not
help hands off process that we
wanted to figure out how to make
this work I would contend
that it is going to matter a lot
to have this variety of
expertise at the table together
again people that have been
incarcerated and people that
have run prisons the sentencing
commission for all that they do
and all that they offer and
again they have a appointing or
or C. to take themselves on this
board does not bring that same
depth of expertise.
I think this is a and I'm.
Section three is.
I guess I'm not seeing in their
committees.
I did these.
Why.
Why we need to have the screen.
This additional group convening.
So that's from may come into
work.
You know I would I would frankly
rename the act.
Instructions on what's persons
act.
And.
The commission that sets it goes
to the board.
Stride sex right sections for.
Of the bill.
And then you have the duties of
the what's worse because that's
really.
Where it's at we.
rescue the act a lot of Inspiron
property in conversation.
What what is yes somebody is
actually just you.
And then read reports about that
boring agent requests for.
About that.
So I might.
One of my Mr Chairman
representative one of the.
The news.
Mr chair and senator for me this
is well as the felt especially
important to compile and compose
the board in this way because
again of the expertise that it
brings together I have deep
respect for the sentencing
commission they do not have
someone with formerly
incarcerated they do not have
someone that's worked as a
security officer attention
officer on the floor of the New
Mexico prison
the sentencing commission.
Well they have a seat for the
corrections department I'm I'm
glad it's there and and the
touch a lot of public safety
this is much more focused around
the duties of the corrections
department it was also really
important to me that this some
buds person if they're bad
allows them to go into these
corrections facilities I don't
want them to turn in to a
lobbyist a governor Lucien's
person someone is offering
recommendations someone that's
having something to say about
what they think and advancing
their own agenda I want them to
walk into these facilities
eventually with the trust of the
secretary and the corrections
administration to know that when
they get in there they really
are going to live up to that
idea of an objective review so
for me I did not want that on
but it's person to be the one
that turned around and wrote
those recommendations and
advocated and push for change I
want them to go in there as a
fact finder I compare it often
Mr chair and senator to the body
camera issue that we worked on
together.
If there could be a circumstance
where there is a complaint filed
an investigation done and this
is but I think it's in there and
they find it that complaint was
unsubstantiated so the
corrections department can file
that away and we can all see
that that actually wasn't an
issue surfacing but for me.
Having this very focus group of
people with extensive lived
experience and expertise on this
issue feels quite different than
the sentencing commission.
Senator.
Thank you just back to this the
complexity of having a victim
advocate involved with our the
person wouldn't have to be a
literal victim I mean there's
plenty of voices out there for
victims that you wouldn't have
that situation right.
And Mister speaker and Senator
Ivey Soto possibly that or the
person that the offender
perpetrator in your case in the
case that caused you harm is
just no longer the vision
supervision of the department so
maybe they served a ten year
sentence they got some good time
they successfully completed
their probation and parole and
then you could be on that board
it's just saying that currently
they cannot be locked up in in
the present or under the
supervision department while
you're on that board Mr chairman
to someone about this.
Our literal victims themselves
it just go passion about there
are a good voice for the
victim's point of view so is
there we have to be a literal
situation Mr chair Senator I
would just also my experts
reminding me given life in New
Mexico these days there is a
likely chance that the majority
of board members will have been
victims of crime and criminal
activity in New Mexico they may
be serving in a different
capacity as someone from the
sentencing commission with
policy and research experience
in corrections but that doesn't
mean that their car hasn't been
broken into that doesn't mean
they haven't had a burglary at
home or been a victim of sexual
assault you know if I if I were
on this board some day in some
far future I would also be on
that board as someone that's
worked in person visitation but
also someone that's been a
victim of a crime and I think
for the sad reality that is New
Mexico likely many people would
be able to bring that position
LFC into these conversations.
That stuff.
The person doesn't come after
the letter I mean just
addressing the complexity the
corrections offered about having
you know a victim and the
perpetrator and presents are
just seems like too many ways
around but anyway services and
thank you do Senator one of the
committee.
Moores.
Motions debatable we come first.
This call vote.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Moores yes Senator no
no.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator do not.
Senator months yes.
Bills table.
seven
somebody here for house bill
seventy nine.
Representative Lane.
Missives to press for three oh
six.
Thank you Mr chair Ryan lane
after three.
Mr chair what house bill through
six does.
Is if you purchase fireman the
state or transfer one.
With the knowledge that you're
transferring that firearm to
someone whose a felon or intends
to commit a crime with that
firearm you would be guilty of
fourth degree felonies so with
that I stand for any questions.
House Bill through six we don't
have anyone Richard in support
or opposition so we'll go right
to members of the committee on
three oh six.
Members the committee.
Shown as a hello is yes we
recognize mental recognition
thank you service so in the
public.
Control.
Mr chair no I'm not I'm carrying
a crime bill this is an aiding
and abetting bill.
As the source.
Well we'll play it.
Right Sir Morris.
Six thousand I just if we saw
certain reading in the back to
jump up on the first say there's
enough money in.
I don't like cops guns not.
Thank you the committee zero six
the motion for the processor do
X. R. o'neill.
Three more sites.
Mr chair be happy to a.
So essentially what we're trying
to target is is felons getting
possession of firearms the
second most common way that
felons obtained firearms are
folks that intend to commit a
crime with a firearm is through
what's called a straw purchase.
So Mister chair what that means
is is I may legally have the
ability to to buy a firearm and
I know that you legally cannot
buy one and I know you're going
to commit a crime with a firearm
so I go and purchase the firearm
with the sole intent of
transferring a firearm to you so
you can commit a felony or
crime.
You will see.
this is really for the.
Criminal lawyers press two
Representative I don't practice
in criminal area but seems to be
like on page two subsection B.
is not necessary in the law that
subsection be on the second page
is prosecution percent of this
section shall not prevent
prevent prosecution present any
other sections of the promo code
is not always self evident that
it was true I was when we.
As a law we're not saying this
is the only lawyer prosecutor
under the reason they have to
have that Mr chair you know I I
think let's Council put that in
there just to make sure that
it's clear that if you were
wrongfully person fired to begin
with it would preclude you from
being prosecuted under any other
section.
Yes this seems pretty self
evident to me I don't think you
need to have that in there I'm
not hearing anybody arguing to
the contrary other than the fact
let's council didn't really
resonate all that much with me
so anyone else in the subject to
the topic thoughts otherwise I'm
gonna move to strike subsection
be re letter that acceptable
sentiment other than making
somebody upstairs let's council
and at the Mr understand right
thanks anyone else committee
questions maybe Scotian.
Right in front of Mr.
I think this was that he
understands I don't know what
are read very definitely the
Senator.
Mr Chairman representative like
all of it is.
for.
The settlement Mr chair then put
ten are you referencing the
number of days or.
Offered for.
Mr chair and pro tem.
My recollection was somewhere
around maybe ninety minutes.
And most that was from my own
**** strictly.
So this.
In that hello.
We need to the and every house
bill that comes in here I am
just trying to advocate for the
Senate bills that are
languishing in the house because
of their
procedures that go through which
is a long debate on the.
So if we don't need to take a
nap in the.
Thank you so roll on the
proposed amendment I'm not gonna
withdraw the motion I appreciate
the argument I understand it
very well we hear that here
frequently this function the
house means so we should maybe
curtail the work we normally do
this committee and I don't I
don't mean that disrespectfully
or suggestions or certain of
this.
This was one of the issues
that means to me you're saying
you don't really well.
He doesn't necessarily want it
out I mean this is this is one
of those issues where the heat
also.
Small it's hard a new there are
a new law on these particular
kinds of purchases I would like
to stay in their ministers
Senator.
And Mr chair us so I just got to
experience a concurrence on the
house floor earlier today and it
put my mind at ease a lot about
worries about concurrence
because they are limiting debate
on concurrence only to the
changes made so the only thing
that would be discussed on
concurrence would be that this
was taken out if you can't re
hash the bill all over again on
concurrence and the house which
I think is actually pretty good
approach Representative might
consider
so.
About what we go to church.
For sure we are doing so for but
but I I just I say that just as
it in hopes of making you feel
better about these changes that
we're making because I don't
think I was expecting a three
hour debate on concurrence on
the bill I was there for earlier
today I was surprised at how
brief it was on a pretty
controversial bill so I don't
think it's necessarily a death
knell to this bill or Senate
bills to make this change.
Several new on the proposed
amendment which strike
subsection B. and relax Senator
o'neill.
All those different land that I
have that experience but.
The schools and to bring with
me.
That.
Dollars thank you for using any
other committee questions debate
discussion all right we're on a
motion to amend by striking
subsection B. wishes to have a
roll call.
Senator XO just.
Senator Moores sass.
Senator when you have Senator
Stewart.
Centered.
Senator Ivey Soto.
For more so.
Senator okay.
That.
Senator yes that amendment fails
members the committee to pass.
For the past.
Bill three oh six.
the substitute for three oh six.
Is there any objection the new
password.
Show some remorse serve on to is
to hate o'neill Stewart and Ivey
Soto in the affirmative.
