Okay.
So that's the.
Miss raven to spend maybe about
ten or fifteen minutes just very
quickly reviewing the
Condos a very extensive piece of
legislation but I know
Legislative Council been looking
at those in a lot of things we
talked about the session already
are implicated by what we do
during the final hours of
presentations will take the
bills I will amounts to that the
second item on the agenda
central thirty five
anesthesiologists assistant
changes that'll be heard next
week not this week we're going
to hear that together with the
another bill that has a
relationship to the same subject
matter so we'll move that for
that reason.
What was the agenda should work
and as I said we're gonna have a
hard stop at six costs will try
and keep the time limits to
presentations mindful of about
two and a half hours of work so
mistreatment thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee the chair noted
I'm elevated LFC fiscal analyst
will be presenting on the status
of implementation of house bill
sixty eight the on this crime
bill he'll have a presentation
in front of you that looks like
this I'll be mostly referring to
that it also has an additional
six attachments with more detail
on some of these items.
If you'll turn with me to slide
two of the chair noted this is a
very expensive bill try to
distill it into nine main
changes that were made but I
will also us reference you to
attachment one that's a section
by section index of the bill
itself with a little more and
more detail there but if you'll
see there's a list of sort of
nine categories will be
presenting on for house bill
sixty eight on slide to
generally going to be reviewing
what the statutory changes were
as well as relevant of related
appropriations and the twenty
twenty two general
appropriations act also provided
an update on the implementation
status the impact of the changes
appropriations and I'll give a
brief overview of twenty twenty
three legislation and
appropriations that are also
relevant to those changes.
If you'll turn with me to slide
three the first topic I'm going
to discuss part of it too law
Enforcement recruitment
retention initiatives that were
included in the bill of starting
with the of program created in
the department of finance and
administration this was created
to provide recruitment and
retention stipends for law
enforcement officers and VGA
included fifty million dollars
for this purpose there were some
line item vetoes of that
appropriation would allow it to
be used for other purposes still
for law enforcement officer
recruitment and retention but
not limited to statements.
LFC has raised some concerns
during the interim with regard
to how these funds were
distributed the funding was
awarded without a clear rigorous
application process in the first
round of funding that was the
distributed in September eight
of the largest twenty law
enforcement agencies in the
state did not receive any
funding.
And while I of those did receive
awards in eighty seconds
subsequent cycle they were
substantially lower than
comparably sized agencies that
receive awards in the first
cycle and all reference you here
to attachments two three and
four for the awards offer each
cycle as well as both top twenty
agencies.
Another item that LESC raised
concerns about was a potential
air and funding awarded to Los
crucis police department
basically the first round of
funding again the off office
funding to fill two hundred and
two vacant law enforcement
officer positions the agency's
entire for strength is two
hundred and two of my best
interpretation is that there is
an error in data entry but again
I think this is what.
He raised concerns that there
wasn't sort of critical I take
into these applications you can
just to make sure that
information with the aircraft
with.
In the introduced version of the
twenty twenty three GA there is
a twenty six million dollar non
recurring appropriation for law
enforcement workforce capacity
building this is an for the same
goal.
As initially as the initial
program in house bill sixty
eight and and the twenty twenty
two DA but this appropriation of
continued on legislation it's
going to provide some guard
rails on the distribution
expenditures of the funds
hopefully resolve some of those
issues that were identified and
in this previous around the
funding.
Of there is a bill is going to
create a law enforcement
workforce capacity building fund
it hasn't yet been introduced so
I can give you a bill number but
it will be on the house side
Representative sticks in lanes.
Also note that Senate bill two
eighty eight aims to amend the
existing program created by
house bill sixty eight to
include law enforcement
personnel who are civilians but
directly support law enforcement
officers I do want to note again
that all all of the funds for
the regional program have been
expended so there is currently
no funding provided for that
program in the GA.
If you'll turn me to fight for
the other recruitment retention
or in this case retention
program created I house bill
sixty eight if the law
enforcement retention pond hi
this is to provide five percent
retention seconds to law
enforcement officers across the
state every five years there is
five million dollars included in
the twenty twenty two GAA for
this purpose that was a
nonrecurring appropriation.
The funding for FY twenty four
in future fiscal years was
planned to come from the law
enforcement protection fund that
may actually be at risk to to
revenue issues with that I
apologize and just a couple of
sites.
In FY twenty three of the PS
distributed two point four
million dollars from the
retention fund to provide
payments to forty seven law
enforcement agencies and seven
hundred and five officers.
On I I.
These P. sixty eight made
substantial changes to
properties for law enforcement
training certification oversight
misconduct this included
dividing the current law
enforcement oversight body into
two entities the law enforcement
certification board and a law
enforcement standards and
training council.
There are a number of of changes
made here most of them do not
take effect until FY twenty four
but over the interim DPS did
identify some concerns that have
the meditation and particularly
regarding timelines for
implementation and what would
happen to cases that we're
currently in the in in process
when those changes took place.
On the other noted they were
reporting these concerns that of
course corrections and Justice
Committee over the interim.
Of the agency reports that the
proposed Senate bill nineteen
addresses these concerns.
The increase version of the
twenty twenty three GA does
include almost a million dollar
increase for the certification
board to give it a total budget
of two point one million dollars
in referring funds it also
includes a one point three
million dollar increase for the
standards and training council
to support these expanded duties
in FY twenty four.
The brief updates from the law
enforcement academy the
significantly reduce their
vacancy rate from all fifty
percent to twenty five percent
that included a filling you FTEs
that were added in FY twenty
three.
In FY twenty two the economy
trade a hundred twenty officers
and seventy one dispatchers it's
certified four hundred and five
offices in ninety three to.
Turning to slide six.
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about the toilets for law
enforcement officers killed in
the line of duty that takes him
up to a million dollars and
reserve correcting residual that
raining and certification all
those changes that we just
talked about on the prior slide.
Of the agency has not yet
received that appropriation for
that
The distribution for FY twenty
three.
There are have been reductions
in revenue to law enforcement
fund to put some of the changes
in jeopardy.
When revenue collection moved
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
the taxation revenue department.
Revenues drop substantially.
When helpful sixty it was
considered projected revenues in
the upcoming years to the law
enforcement protection fund were
around twenty million or twenty
five million but ultimately FY
twenty two revenues were just
six million dollars.
So I'll note that all for free
to attachment I for an updated
projection for the law
enforcement protection fund that
shows this but ultimately we're
looking at a potential for call
of seventy million dollars in
law enforcement protection fund
and three point seven million
dollars in law enforcement
retention Fund if no additional
probation or other adjustments
are made.
Generally when that happens the
statute provides for DFA to
reduce the size of distributions
to law enforcement agencies
proportionally to what they
would have otherwise received
with what funding is available
as a result of these the climate
if that happens a project the
agencies won't see even see the
increased distributions from us
prior legislation such as twenty
twenty two south the one eighty
four that took effect this year.
For the increases that were
implemented house bill sixty
eight in order to take place in
FY twenty four so that that's
just you know something for the
committee to be aware of does a
lot of.
a lot of the considerations of
the costs of the changes in
house bill sixty eight we're
considered in light of increased
distributions to HSD for to help
them be able to deal with both
teams this is probably
particularly concerning to those
agencies fiddles with.
Eight five seven hi house bill
sixty eight also created five
new crimes those included
threatening a judge or immediate
family member of a judge a
fourth degree felony maliciously
sharing personal information a
judge or immediate family member
that's a misdemeanor making a
shooting threat also misdemeanor
operating a Topshop which of
third degree felony and criminal
damage to property by sector
tended to regulate material that
has a range of tiered penalties
based on the value of the damage
but it goes from a petty
misdemeanor to a fourth degree
felony.
On slide seven you'll see a
table that outlines the changes
of the charges and convictions
that the federal maybe related
to those requests to date as
well as what that house bill
sixty eight fiscal impact report
projected the state would face
increased costs for each present
in mission for those friends.
According to AOC sixteen people
have been charged with new
crimes created by house bill
sixty eight there's been two
convictions eleven cases are
currently pending.
No charges have been filed for
either of the crimes against
judges of the family members.
To see most charges are we have
a file for making a shooting
threat that's a misdemeanor and
doesn't affects us state funds.
If I entered is for operating
instruction up in the Mr
property benefit the regular
maintenance related material
result in prison admissions the
state could realize an
additional two hundred thousand
dollars or so in costs.
slide eight
we outline changes to existing
crimes and penalties the house
bill sixty eight made of four
major changes it remove the
statute of limitations on second
degree murder it increased PED's
expenses for serious violent
felons in possession of a
firearm three years to six years
created a new subset of
aggravated fleeing a law
enforcement officer in cases in
which that results injury that
moved it from eight point three
felony to a third degree felony
in those instances it also made
several changes to firearm
enhancements on slide eight
you'll see another table they
have heard is convictions and
production costs related to
those changes.
If the reports a hundred and
fifty four people have been
charged for the crimes change
right helpful succeeds in both
changes took effect the vast
majority of these are for a
felony possession charges with
the underlying felony with the
serious violent offence.
If all these pending cases were
to resolve present emissions
which is unlikely the state
would face up off of up to eight
point three million dollars
thank you want to know that
seven point four million dollars
and that would be due to the
change in sentence for serious
violent felons in possession of
a fire.
Moving to slide nine.
Also sixty eight also created a
program for the administrative
office of the courts to
distribute requests for pre
trial services one of the
stipulations is also for the
court for HSD to examine
standardization that can be done
through this process as well as
encouraging of the electronic
monitoring for supervision for
offenders on pre trial release.
The twenty twenty two GAA
included four million dollars
nonrecurring of money for these
requests.
Just see if if the addition of
seven pre trial Services sites
in FY twenty three and three
more in FY twenty four with the
goal of statewide implementation
by the end of FY twenty five
with regard to standardization
the agency reports they have
standardized guidelines and
policies that are in line with
evidence based practices and
national standards as well as
the data management system that
allows them to monitor
compliance and performance.
The twenty twenty three DA
includes four million dollars to
get a nonrecurring money for
both pre trial services and
frequent point.
On slide ten dresses electronic
monitoring also included
provisions that require the
sharing of GPS monitoring data
with law enforcement without a
warrant as part of an ongoing
impact pending criminal
investigation and if there is a
reasonable suspicion that the
data is probative.
In September HSD adopted
standard GPS data sharing
procedures and since September
they have had ten requests for
this data.
Their electronic monitoring and
supervision unit has
investigated forty six thousand
dollars which have resulted in
just one hundred and twenty
seven request for a bench
warrants.
The new agency knows is
currently providing after hours
monitoring and six County it's
in the process of expanding to
three more judicial district and
it has a goal of expanding to
all districts that use GPS
monitoring I end of FY twenty.
Turning to slide eleven.
Hi another thing that health
will succeeded was to expand the
allowable uses of crime
reduction requests these
expensive these is include
developing or improving
coordination of services between
law enforcement agencies and
treatment programs establishing
law enforcement crisis
intervention teams coordinating
access to programs for
transitional reentry homes for
free or retaining law
enforcement officers prosecutors
public defenders correctional
officers and mental health
workers developing or expanding
data driven policing programs
and stuff their personal justice
coordinating council
The twenty twenty two GAA did
include a two million dollar
nonrecurring increase for this
program is contingent on those
changes.
The sentencing commission will
be distributing one point three
million dollars in requests for
these purposes in FY twenty
three there's a grant a chart
summarizing of that on slide
eleven as well.
And a full list of bills of
course is included on
attachments six the twenty
twenty three introduce GA
includes four million dollars
for these requests to be
expended over two fiscal years
FY twenty four in FY twenty
five.
I will know that you'll see on
the table the largest
expenditures for these
recruitment and retention of
costs these were primarily
awarded for district attorneys
and public defenders.
Introduced twenty twenty three
GA does include funding to
establish two new grant programs
that are focused on providing
one time awards for recruitment
and retention of district
attorneys public defenders and
law enforcement that's the.
Bill I noted earlier has not yet
been introduced.
The initiate as providing total
of thirty million dollars in
funding for this four million
dollars for the attorneys twenty
six million dollars for law
enforcement this should free up
these prime production grant
funds to focus on either
recruitment retention of the
other physicians practice
officers mental health workers
not covered by the new proposal
that as well as the other local
purposes of the crime reduction
requests including both the new
purposes and the original
purposes that the drugs were
allowed to be used for.
Turning to slide twelve health
will succeed added three new
judgeships in the second fifth
and thirteenth judicial district
the twenty twenty two GAA funded
the judgeships in the fifth and
thirteenth bills have since been
filled the twenty twenty three
GA includes funding for the new
Jessica the second which has not
been filled but they expect to
have it filled after the funding
sources.
Turning to slide thirteen.
The violence intervention
program was also created by
house bill sixty eight mandated
the the department of health to
administer funds intervention
program grants we are directed
to entities that are
disproportionately impacted by
violent crimes which include
homicides shootings and
aggravated assaults the twenty
twenty two GAA included nine
million dollars a nonrecurring
funds for those grants and one
point seven million dollars in
ongoing funding for office and
violence prevention at the O.
H..
You H. received three
applications in its first round
of funding for its first round
of requests for this purpose it
will be funding to with the
violence intervention program
funds and the third with other
funds.
The second round of applications
is planned for the spring and
the agency is currently in the
process of hiring a violence
prevention program coordinator.
I'm finally turning to slide
fourteen House Bill succeed also
prohibited defendants from using
a strategy called the panic or
transplanted as a defense of
justification or excuse for
crime the public defender's
report they haven't heard of
such a defense these recently
have not seen any cases thus far
revenue prohibition presented
issue but they do note that they
don't expect of cases in which
is an issue to occur frequently.
On slide fifteen outline just a
couple of next steps as noted in
the presentation Senator is a
legislation and appropriations
being considered this session
what impact these changes and
program.
And in you know during the rest
of the session in the interim
LFC will continue to monitor the
implementation of house bill
sixty eight programs and provide
reports upon request thank you
for presentation Mr chair and
I'm happy to stand for any
question from the committee
thank you when we would not
attorney for anyone to ask any
questions on updated at a few
particularly with regard to the
GPS monitoring.
The trial services but I'll go
first to the committee members
with any questions.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair
looking at slide eleven.
I'm curious facts for two of
these zero grants awarded for
data driven the fleecing and
transitional living in reentry
health.
Is it that no one applied for
this grant award people I.
And did not get.
Mr chair and senator fortunately
I do not have a definite answer
to that question but I would not
that I feel like the sense of
mission generally tries to fund
those programs that apply for
funding from the crime reduction
grant program so I would hazard
a guess that that they did not
receive applications but I can
absolutely follow up on that
question for you with the
commission staff and get you a
definitive answer.
Thank you.
so I'm and.
Surprise that
Albuquerque has applied for by
the VIP lounge prevention
program grants City of
Albuquerque was primarily
question that.
Last year
And.
I have a little entertains that
there's only been ten requests
for that electronic monitoring
GPS that is you would have
thought listening to some of the
testimony last year Mr chair
that they are demanding this
data every three minutes and.
the sky was falling.
When the governor had this bill
front of her over that issue so.
Also asking staff that's an.
Well we don't use that.
The regular.
In center others with questions
at this point time with that we
can stimulate a few more with
some time we've got no more
notice must be searching also
all of all join in on that a
little bit you raise a good
point that Senator but also I'll
come back to a little bit of.
You mentioned the on with regard
to the page three.
One of our goals was to attract
and keep law enforcement
officers we have a shortage in
the store.
As Senator points out the
politicians all get up and talk
about all the shortage of being
able to attract and keep on
officers so we created the
retention program which set
aside fifty million dollars
which was appropriated for
stipends as I understand it when
you mention the governor vetoed
some of the language is that
right yes Mr chair and members
of the committee the governor
used her line item veto
authority to remove some of the
requirements on that fifty
million dollars appropriation
that included removing the
requirement to be spent on
recruitment and retention
statins specifically and as well
as a moving some of the
constraints on how much funding
could be expended each year the
original appropriation envision
being expended over a period of
five years I believe with
specific limitations on how much
could be expended each year
these were hesitant yeah and
just so the committee is clear
what what the executive here was
we put that appropriation to
spread over five years and
should be taught out the
languages that spread over five
years kept any of the
appropriation we also included
in the original plan that the
fifty million dollars be
specifically for stipends to
retain law enforcement officers
and the governor vetoed out the
second language but left in the
money and called that an
exercise of a line item veto I
hi.
Have a very strong opinion and
I'm still looking at all the
lawyers smaller group that's
illegal that's unlawful and
there are on the and there are a
number of cases where that type
of a line item veto has been
struck by the courts is altering
the intent and the prerogative
of the legislature I I know that
because at least a couple of us
have challenge with the governor
of steps out of line and takes
non constitutional role in the
appropriation process although
we haven't done so here but I
don't think that we let that
pass without notice and you know
I I guess we'll talk more about
when.
No those types of challenges
appropriate but I'll just note
that I've ever the case is
calculated so before senators so
no I another's challenged the
the federal monies of the
could be it expended without
legislative oversight I read the
cases carefully as were in there
are some cases that are directly
on this point the government
cannot exercise a line item veto
to strike language that changes
the intent of the appropriation
that's clearly what was done
here so you know we're we're
maybe looking at this the small
pass over the plate without
taking a swing at it but I think
that's probably important to
note I think it's unfortunate.
Because we put a lot of work and
effort a lot of hearings we this
this bill involved in a lot of
work I'm very thoughtful input
from a lot of people to do what
it was to keep law enforcement
officers and then of course when
you we take fifty million
dollars in the side as we did to
spread over five years in the
executive strikes out the spread
of five years and spends it all
in one year well you know we're
gonna have a little close to
have fifty million dollars is
being spent on and maybe your
guys to jump at the chance of
that fifty million dollars been
drawn down all in one year Mr
chair and members of the
committee of the I will know
that all of the fifty million
dollars or.
Forty nine point something
million dollars have been
awarded to agencies they have
stated that they will be on
given out over a three year
period most of the awards were
intended it appears to pay for
vacant salaries for vacant law
enforcement officer position in
that first round of funding it
was intended that the first year
funding would fully fund all of
those vacant positions the
second year would funded I think
seventy five percent in the
third year at fifty percent and
so they they did spread the
award intention over over three
years but all of the funding has
been committed and I will also
note with regard to your earlier
point Mr chair that the
Legislative Council Service did
fly this line item veto as a
potentially problematic one and
we did for LFC to prepare a memo
after the first round of round
of funding was announced in a
lot more detail regarding what
the process was what was it line
item veto to mills concerns and
goes into a lot more detail and
I'm happy to provide that to the
committee of the chair if you
would find that helpful it would
be and then my comments on this
review of the bill is not gonna
be directed solely to the role
of the governor because of a
few.
Shots of the quarter to that I'm
gonna take in my comments but
again it's it's not to be
disrespectful of either two
bridges except to recognize we
have a system of checks and
balances that doesn't work when
we're not willing to assert our
role as a check and balance on
on the other two branches so
your I would appreciate you sure
that memorandum evidently I'm
not hearing any of my colleagues
suggesting a veto override or
any legislative change anything
so we're.
You said that the but the
council service flag this week
to as I think you're we're was
problematic and it's illegal and
there's not very much question
about that but and one of our
and if are we going to do
something about it well that's
for us to determine the extent
of our backbone releases the
legislature and sometimes we
don't show very much back of.
The of the the other example of
that in which case quite a bit
more respect to this branch we
passed in this bill language
related to GPS monitoring
senator brought up the point
that we were being asked to make
that information much more
available to law enforcement we
did that the court very probably
after that issue some rules they
promulgated which limited
precisely what we have and act
and the court took on in my
opinion strongly the law making
and legislative rolled by doing
so
Differently than perhaps my
relationship and interaction
with the executive branch of
this bill I sat down with chief
justice and and maybe junction
no the that in my opinion the
the court the Supreme Court was
acting in a legislative role by
that court ruled and the justice
was good enough to meet with me
and met with also with Philip
and others along the way and and
came out with the revised order
that I think recognized that
there is a lane for for the
court in the process as well too
so I want to commend the court
in that regard as well too so
I'm just a saying I think we
have to be diligent about this
so that we had a good idea for
for the stipends that think it's
important executive up better
but but I think you more
questions that we.
We don't say something about
you know we may not do something
about it but within three weeks
we should say something about.
So.
These were important points in
part of the reason when we come
back today I also think this
also leads to.
tasked with our brand we able to
provide that for me the
information.
So you know one of the recurring
issues that I brought up the
session thank you is this notion
that we need new laws and that's
why things aren't working right
we need to pass a law to do this
we passed a lot of that and and
that's always uses an excuse for
why things don't happen so
I read in the paper this week.
The individual John on Joe
Anderson I believe was charged
with murder.
In the first degree last year in
Albuquerque.
That individual was released by
district judge Rodolfo
despite the charge of first
degree murder this is an
individual who previously in two
thousand sixteen man convicted
about balance voluntary
manslaughter.
and despite that conviction in
two thousand sixteen and despite
the charge of murder of the
trial court in Albuquerque in
indicated this individual should
be released on the GPS monitor
to the credit of the district
attorney I think it's important
to get it when it's due the
challenge that was taken after
the Supreme Court Supreme Court
disagreed with judge Rudolfo and
and concluded that this
individual should have been
detained when the police
proceeded to have a warrant
executed to bring him in after
the Supreme Court reversed a
judgment off of.
Of they could find because he
cut off his ankle monitor and
he's now on the loose they're
looking for an individual
convicted of voluntary
manslaughter in two thousand
sixteen charged with first
degree murder last year and
was released.
So.
Representative twenty to pre
trial detention presumption but
perhaps there's another easier
solution right in front of our
face.
There's more shots for the day.
senator Morris.
Sure under point about the line
on your frustration years now I
think the last three governors
included in both parties have
interesting grammar change
required items added Carlos of
striking one zeros are
appropriations are adding ones
of our.
The previous governor additive
one interpretation of users
legislature's job as you know
over the Johnson agency refuses
to table them fire in the of
course legislature overrode one
will be some of those that is
our job I'm sorry I'm having
issues or co op you'll ride with
you for long sturdy reliable I
hope the council service and
others would start fighting back
give every success executive.
What's the right has got worse
and worse and we push back on
the creative entities that they
do on finance bills it's just
going to get worse and worse
with the minister or the bill
so
it's it's
sort of what the governor's ago
everyone's learned their lessons
from all.
Most requests back it's that's
our problem.
Back or not but that's what the
constitution it was right to do.
The duty so of course we may
just because you're addressing
my comments if I may just take
the prerogative all this through
the only on one thing which is
that if we do Council services
to fight back that's not the
role of cancer service
the council services to advise
us and to highlight the actions
taken but it's for you and me to
fight back in you mentioned that
this is been done by the last
three executives my recollection
of one of the cases I believe I
read was to challenge the the
case the thing that was reported
on this was a challenge to
Senator sorry to governor
Susana Martinez's vetoes I
recall right so so we don't in
her case we did challenge that
type of a line item veto
directing the courts upheld the
roll of the legislature's that
it was improper of her to have
done so so we've done it before
the past but I don't want to.
Start getting full soft mineral
to use and more so I would I
don't want to put that on on
Council services for your
point's well taken the other
thing too is that I made a
mental note this is for our
staff and good lawyers we know
we we need to revisit the veto
process we've talked to years
past about a veto session or
some bills being automatically
subject to reconsideration in
various sessions I think we
should be talking about this the
the framers of the constitution
at the federal level at the
state level intended there to be
a check on the veto by a veto
override and the reality is that
is a figment of our imagination
these days I don't remember us I
don't have barely remember it
the federal government ever
overriding a presidential veto I
can't we can't members of what's
happened but I can't remember
one of of a veto over
presidential veto that's because
we've become so tribal and so
determined to protect our party
income but that we would never
embarrass and executive by
overriding a veto that seems to
be of what's happening at the
federal level and the same thing
is happening at the state level
which is why I put it out there
Moores the challenge that was
made what was by us as Democrats
in the majority of the
Republican governors of the toes
and that was of a proper
exercise of legislative
oversight but we were probably
willing to do so because what we
were of office apartments and
and I'm trying to member last
time that we as a legislature
overrode a veto by the governor
of the hi my mic my colleagues
are going to remember my own it
was that was the it was a
struggle when we we finish we
here's just an example an
illustration so when governor
Martinez veto the entire budget
for higher education.
A small problem putting Mexico
state you in and out of business
we were prepared to come in to
override the veto in there was
very strong support once again
to protect the embarrassment of
the of the administration
instead of doing a veto override
we love the executive to
essentially get a Mulligan and
re passed the budget for higher
education a second time and sign
it rather than override the
veto.
And that's an illustration of
our.
I'm willing this and lack of
backbone candidly to override a
veto when it's appropriate we
all strongly intended to
override a veto but we were
willing to do it with the
support of our Republican
colleagues candidly so as a so
as a pass to somebody other than
the Martinez we just letter as I
said do Mulligan we we passed
the hired budget second time
letter signed it getting it
right rather than having to
override I I don't think it
should be so hard to override a
veto and so I I hope will we we
have some solutions we've had
some suggestions and ideas and I
hope we will give us more
attention from time to time so
that does make a big deal that
we all right every time the
governor excessively to override
that goes back into the process
of of of of governance that
frankly the framers intended all
along is to not allow the
executive during a tract so
those those are my pontificate
tions so sinister the we'll go
back to some was better so I can
make a point
Senator Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr Chairman it's my
understanding that there.
There's quite a few number of
states to actually schedule
ahead of time a veto override
session two or three days no
within a week or two of their
regular session so I agree with
you.
That we've become more tribal
and that the veto override is
just one of our tools and other
states use that better than we
do so I don't know how to change
it.
Probably have to wait for
another governor to change it
but but but I agree with you
that we're not really doing our
due diligence and that it it
doesn't feel right to override
that the governor of your own
party
so but but that's not the case
in other states they're not.
Bottle down by that the way we
are.
Thank you service sort of.
Thank you Mr chair just two
things real quick one is
Congress did arrive of the total
of the national defense
authorization act.
That that Senator are that that
president trump.
The total three weeks before
leaving office but that was the
first time that there were a
state you for years and years
that's right up the other thing
is we're looking at because I
just just remind that
A former member of this of this
panel had a cost estimates of
years ago that would have
provided for a pocket passage in
all cases.
unless the governor actively be
towed and wrote a message.
And so for looking at at.
At that section that's something
to consider.
As well thank you so much just
announced on many of your points
I strongly support what the US
are sort of was talking about
what was suppose I think it's
important that the government
provide us with a message on on
bills I would like to remind my
colleagues of other have spend
and I'm not sure Senator Stewart
was in the Senate you should
probably remembers the issue be
it better than I do but a the
previous governor Republican
governor we had a veto override
in the Senate led by us
Republicans Republican caucus
led a veto override over the
city Republican governors and we
took a lot of heat we have a lot
of people coming into our office
and as a caucus we're the one to
lead that effort
dealt with education issues and
member having the purse the
secretary of education at the
time come in and talk to us in
our office so and we still made
that effort and we passed a veto
override on the Senate is
blocked in the house so I would
remind my and my colleagues that
they can be done it should be
done and because we do expect
the power of the legislative
branch.
Thank you.
We will.
What is the closing of the
subject and on this review.
And hearing a lot this session
about we need to
professionalizing the
legislature we need to modernize
the legislature.
So we can put on paper that we
need to be stronger and more
modern but here's an example of
where my colleagues oftentimes
my caucus state the
legislature's week and to me
could I smile because we choose
witness
we do so willingly and it's the
most effective way to avoid
accountability.
So as long as we choose to
remain weak then we avoid and
are able to wash our hands of
accountability for the many
things that we know ales
assistance state and we can
choose something other than
weakness but it's gonna take
some courage Dixon backbone of
it's going to take some
accountability when we get to
that point then we can talk
about modernizing the
legislature and and a
professionalizing the
legislature.
The.
Thank you very much for The
presentation today.
Thank you Mr Taft provoked was
interesting conversation this
committee I was as it is here
there's more down to was that we
had no agenda at all and and we
just come in here and have a
free for all and and sometimes
those to be I think learning
experience for me so we have
cinnamon you know stuff first
bill one of two very important
bill to keep cars from driving
in the left hand lane except
when passing I don't know what
we retrieving them
would you please.
And chili thinking.
The.
Able.
But we don't have Senator
Hickey.
Over there is some good news
well as we can we get a report
from Sergio she's chairing this
committee so I told we'd be very
accommodating to get free.
Well it's true we all know the
importance of keeping the chair
of the Senate finance committee
one or two sides.
Force.
I don't know your bills moving
over.
Do you have a it's going.
Twenty
eight.
As for his.
Have.
Okay well we'll proceed with
Senator Hickey on the Senate
Bill anyone.
Serrano's be disposed of.
Can you do if we could sure.
Your.
Thank you very much.
the.
If you're a committee of this
I privilege to come before you
today and Senate bill eighty one
hopefully this is a very simple
bill.
And we're that is actually does
is the following for a child to
get a medical.
rationale for not having an
immunization.
A signature of the physician is
required.
Given our shortage of physicians
throughout the state and given
the great capabilities that our
finance practice practitioners
in particular nurse
practitioners and positions
associates.
to be able to take care of many
issues but certainly one to
assess an individual's and
potential medical vulnerability
if one exists such as a allergy
to eggs for some immunizations
and so forth they should
certainly be able to be the ones
who sign that up.
reasons for not of no longer
having the immunization and so
basically this bill simply
goes back in and changes the
previous bill
NMSA seventy eight twenty four
dash five dash three to allow
physician assistants and nurse
practitioners to authorize that
to read the from the
immunization based on medical
grounds and I have miss Linda
Siegel here with me if she would
like to add any further
comments.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee briefly this came
about because a nurse
practitioner had a long time
patient who was a minor and for
she had some kind of allergy
which would have prevented a
certain immunization and she
didn't know she couldn't sign
the form until she was told by
the O. H. that only physician
consent form so that is why we
actually brought this bill in
twenty one and it passed the
Senate and died somewhere in the
house.
Because of time so thank you.
Thank you we didn't have anyone
signed up for either support or
opposition of this bill so we'll
go to questions from the
committee Senator Stewart.
That's.
Right any additional discussion.
yes senator Morris thank you
madam chair thank you doctor
thank you we'll see what
on this occasion training new
nurses or.
Additional assistance and
certified nurse practitioners
and school have that qualifies
them for this information is.
thank you madam chair Senator
nurse practitioners have a
nursing degree and are in
bachelor's nursing degree and
then they must go to
nurse practitioner school for
two to four years depending on
whether they get a master's
degree or doctorate degree they
have extensive training and
health care The New Mexico
statutes give nurse
practitioners complete
prescriptive authority an
independent practice in more out
there all over our New Mexico
providing primary care and
specialty care to patients.
Sure Senator I get all that but
where where the curriculum is
that any kind of a negative
reaction.
I to the shops
is it covered in the curriculum.
Well there education provides
extensive training on all health
care issues right I couldn't
sign up for a curriculum that
they would have about this.
Perhaps the doctor can and
where's the doctor training on
this issue.
thank places the nurse practice
system training we get that we
all get talk about pharmacy we
all get talked about drug
reactions we all get taught how
to draw blood how to give
immunizations how to look for
signs and symptoms of drug
reactions a hundred look at
signs and symptoms of very says
these is we all learn how to do
histories and physicals and then
every history there's always
ask do you have any allergies I
mean this is just a standard
question that has to be filled
out so basically the
History and physical that goes
on that or what we call a so no
and then office visit would
cover particularly the allergy
component but again all those
other criteria are covered in
the curriculum both clinically
and didactic.
Measurements Mr chair Senator
on.
The drive through a screen for a
lot longer.
Services that we're already
seeing huge up to.
And vaccine session last couple
years vaccine hesitancy soon
school of alternates
not getting vaccines for
children were sooner or
recurrence of disease we've
almost gone.
Server and I have concerns that
anything that makes it easier to
drive vaccine is going to
continue that were exaggerated
that problem.
we're seeing uh with.
This next generation of not
getting their kids vaccinated
so.
I'm gonna.
Those are the service users.
Mr chair and Senator Moores
I I share a concern about the
decrease penetration of vaccines
going on in the country and the
but the optics is really and
religious reasons.
And I understand California just
passed a really tough
controversial bills tightening
up some of the religious
restrictions I'm not as
concerned about being able to
detect and authorize with the
training that these individuals
have as well as physicians for
all the reasons I stated in
being able to determine medical
situations which would create a
situation where the vaccine
could potentially be harmful to
the individual medically.
This is Mr chair Senator on the
a lot of the of the secretary
not your kids accident is not
claim religious exemptions for
rural areas without.
Upper middle class white
families and highly educated
areas all that is for some
reason because we were in the
internet site if they don't want
to get their kids vaccinated
might be using a religious
exemption or question I actually
truly religious conviction but
so it's about the size.
So
I just I just don't know if you
have easier for people to get
vaccinated of schools with.
Amendment.
For them to
This is the
Mr chair Senator but there
should.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you Senator for your views
Maybe you've had too much
exposure to Robert Kennedy
junior
middle class
anti immunization individual
those.
Hey.
Yeah I I I I agree but again I
don't think that has any bearing
upon the capabilities of these
advanced practice individuals
with all the training to be able
to the Herman a potentially
adverse medical outcomes of of
giving a vaccine so I I
certainly respect that what
you're saying and and perhaps
I'm going to study what happened
in California apparently blood
was thrown on this individual
was a physician by the anti
vaxxers and what have you trying
to tighten up but I think it is
something that bears looking
into in the future thank you for
your observations.
Further discussion
Representative.
thank you madam chair thank you
Thank you the silver bring this.
This bill
Along the lines of.
Senator of course is this you
know it does seem to be that.
But I don't I'm not concerned
about.
Including physician assistants
or certified nurse practitioners
because they're doing it based
on on was only there in the next
on sites
In a but but I do know that we
just well an active reformation
from Travis barely larger.
And you know sort of course we
want to cut down on on the
number of unvaccinated kids in
school.
Also a lot of the religious
exception.
Number two but I have to have
somebody an officer from the
recognized listed on Asian.
that would be the district
from the parent or legal
guardian so that so that you
have to go to the religious
officer to Senator.
Not going to happen if you we
got a backseat or or to
medical officer.
the state that you're going to
have to have a lot quicker if
you do get a vaccine and so.
servers on this on this point
that out to the new can we look.
make an impact on the.
Representative motions.
Both of them here as a result of
this of course you were you're
the one who was.
In the science here and so on.
Simply assistance process.
So
The gentleman I would move that
on page two.
Line one please practice right
through in the for.
The minutes of the page to line
seven are.
We up front the semi colon and
the organs for a period.
Page two lines eight through
twelve strike.
Thank you this seconded and can
look at that and then I'll ask
you the trend line so service
are just removes a point where
we say your striking a strike on
the U. stricken existence
CenturyLink.
The I don't have a with the
proper the proper way to phrase
that is you know we say strikes
amounts were striking something
from the bill as opposed to
strikers General Motors I just
wanna make sure we're all
speaking the same language.
But thank you madam chair
It's an issue that needs to be
deliberative time as I said I
will be studying what happened
in California but that's not the
issue we're trying to deal with
here today so I would see that
as an unfriendly amendment
because I would like to get this
done especially as we continue
to have fewer and fewer
providers in the state of.
Madam chair of center or
with probably the.
However I will I will also note
chair of the one of the issues
is we have a New Mexico is not
provide stations.
This but participate in
vaccination registry.
Is.
And it does seem to me that as a
public health.
We should want all vaccinations
for the list of the vaccination
Representative
and I believe after.
Of that madam chair and Senator
Ivey Soto I I have to go back a
little bit in my history during
practice but I believe we have
to if every physicians and
practitioners office of the
situation where they're giving
vaccines there is a vaccine
registry that is kept by the
state and yet the chairman
Center R. S. V. that is correct
however.
this patient vaccination
restrict this option.
And in fact position
is to actually ask the patient.
Not only do you want the
vaccine.
What would you like to be listed
in the vaccination registry
which seems like a fairly opting
to ask particularly since the
vaccination.
Registry service as an important
public health component in the
case of an operator president
was actually receive the vaccine
for not actually.
Became aware of this
I became aware this cause of of
Have a look as I had some years
ago where
at some point in our life every
time the child ended up with
with the noncustodial parents
relatives.
They were going to get a
vaccines.
Even though there is an
agreement between the parties
that there would be no vaccine.
And and then there are also
opting out of the registry and
and so
you know twenty four five eight
provides that physicians nurses
pharmacists other healthcare
providers shall report on
immunization immunization
registry unless the patient or
the patient's guardian of
visions my refuses to allow
reporting of this information.
Madam chair and senator thank
you for that information I
personally was not aware of that
I don't recall myself us if
people would get or did not want
to be part of a registry so that
are there that long it just gave
me again it is worth it is worth
looking into in the future but
yes I would like to take
advantage of the moment we have
here to pass this bill so that
we can.
Get the authorization for the
nurse practitioners and
physicians' assistants and then
I would be happy to spend time
with.
Before next session invites you
to L. HHS to make your case
about having a mandatory
register.
Madam chair and see that Senator
Hickey is.
Satisfied with the the low bar
this current bill.
The.
What comprehensive approach and.
I.
So
you Jerry it's just a for
context are have some history
with but the ability a few years
ago New Mexico actually does
really well with vaccination
coverage if you compare to
nationally I think we're like
the top you know fits in the
nation or something so it's
something that we as a state
have done historically very well
thank you.
And.
Mr chair of legislative push
back a little bit on the
suggested this is a low of our.
Hello hello you know I agree
with the suggestion for the
amendment I was looking forward
to voting on.
No center if you will those work
we're fifty if the to many
things were at the bottom week
all the moment and then we take
baby tepid steps every bit of
the way and that's not what you
do when you're at the bottom you
know when you're in the
deplorable state desperate times
call for desperate measures and
you know what with the support
of the member in the
there would have been some
perhaps some opposition from
parents to think that the only
reform what they should have to
do is to declare by signing an
affidavit that the religious
beliefs prohibit this from
happening in the.
That's a pretty low bar itself
in fact I can't think of a lower
bar David me as a parent saying
I signed up but in my case of
utilization because.
I don't believe the dragons in
need of space lasers and all
that vaccinations going the same
category so.
There are I would like to
support it but I but I I think
that rather than suggest that
you're accepting the little bars
etcetera I I I want to commend
you for being a quick learner
you know mean you're you're you
you're one of our newest members
are fresh numbers that you've
learned that sometimes getting a
bill passed
insisting to your purpose is is
sometimes more important than
those of us who might hijack it
today you're good idea and and
and and check some steroids to
use your to use your profession
but I'd like to be part of the
that would encourage the
steroids steroid approach to
what you're today nonetheless
all all support your effort to
take a.
A step in the right direction
this thing to smaller steps
thank you thank you senator
survive days and and again I I I
do agree with both of you that
we need to set the high I but
one of the things that is the
Senator Cervantes says we
sometimes don't do courageous
things
I think sometimes we do I have a
couple of bills are pretty
courageous that won't be coming
to this community more coming to
some others having to do with
limited mental health is.
But but but what I wonder what I
want to emphasize is those bills
Probably took thirty forty hour
weeks most of the summer for me
and some consultants to research
through and I would like to take
the appropriate time to research
through so it is truly a high
bar that isn't held up by just a
little pen that is fully there
to be able to jump over and thus
I think the research into what
California went through would
greatly benefit the probability
of passing such a bill next year
thank you.
Well the past motion.
For office you want a moment.
Catch up on the discussion
before the.
As far as as any internal
discussion.
There is there any objection to
the defense motion.
Sanitation senators more sterile
office as objecting and with
that you.
I do pass five to three.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair thank you committed
thank you.
Good.
Situated for.
All right thanks for the hearing
SB eighty four.
Do.
Everyone.
This.
Members of the committee.
Leave the.
There
soon get
this is to really process.
Yeah that.
It's a good.
Of.
Most of the.
Get their own.
Zoom zoom.
Hi all right thank you
Neil
Go ahead and proceed with your
presentation thank you madam
chair members I do have a
committee substitute so if we
can move it for discussion of
the most awesome.
Madam chair I do not have some
stability for and do passed for
purposes of discussion Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
percent health and public
affairs committees that fifty
percent of the lady for okay the
objections that motion saying
that the committee says.
Discussion great well thank you
madam chair and members this
bill basically revises the
system governing violations of
probation and parole conditions
here's the here's the problem
all right and many of you are
familiar with this those of you
who are lucky enough to be on
the interim CCJ committee as a
feel like we've been talking
about technical parole
violations for for years well at
some point it's time to actually
do something about that you know
the ria here's what it is right
now and we have five hundred
fifty three hundred prisoners
incarcerated in our state system
nine hundred and eight of these
are they're not for new felonies
but for technical parole
violations Representative
seventeen percent of the our
prison population and then like
at the cost of twenty million
dollars to the to the state so
here's the deal I I know this
issue personally back when I was
working with that this agency
house and folks that we're
really struggling trying to live
up to their conditions of parole
it's almost always not always
but almost always they they
can't they yes thirty for for
various substances so the the
trick here is to hold these
individuals accountable for
their choices and at the same
time a knowledge that this is
really is so many times and
addiction issues with you know
we can just unlimited like
giving you know however many
dirty urine's etcetera so what
we've done here is we've we've
addressed this problem with not
revoking parole and put it in
you know so they're serving the
rest of their sentence for years
a great expense and I feel like
we've come up with a really good
solution or at least you know I
I think so at least since based
on a bit on Louisiana they're
doing some really innovative
stuff around this issue but I
mean you know if.
You're okay with you know
seventy percent of our prison
population being there for
technical parole violations for
like you know at twenty million
dollars you know that's that's
your right but I personally feel
strongly we can do better and
that's where this bill comes
from and now I will turn it over
to Kim Chavez Cook you can
really explain what this bill is
about which is with the
Appellate Division of the public
defender's office.
Thank you Mr chairman chair so
the context for this legislation
is that before the nineteen
seventies and eighties tough on
crime movie changed the
conversation supervised release
was entirely an alternative to
prison rehabilitative concept
and after a few decades of of
tough on crime tough we start it
started to come more of a driver
of prison the prison population
rather than an alternative
because probation officers went
for more of a social worker type
of role to arm and arm of law
enforcement to sort of surveil
people and see if they were
making mistakes and enforce
penalties if they work so it is
true that prison populations
overall have been on the decline
but the percentage of inmates
that are there on probation or
parole violations is significant
nationally forty five percent of
prison admissions are because of
probation or parole violations
which is about twenty five
percent of it the expanding
prison populations nationwide.
I don't have a quit line
accurate numbers for New Mexico
because we do not distinguish
between an entry for a probation
violation and an entry for the
underlying felony it's just
logged as an entry on the
underlying felony so I cannot
give you an accurate number of
how many people are in the
department corrections right now
on probation violations we do
distinguish for parole
violations and that's the
numbers that the sponsor just
provided nine hundred and eight
inmates at and that is in a
snapshot moment June June
thirtieth twenty twenty two
these are numbers from the
sentencing commission there to
hand out the contains these
which is seventeen percent of
prison inmates are there on
parole violations we there was a
study if that UNM did in two
thousand eighteen I believe that
was over an eighteen month
period to try and look at every
single file and come up with
similar numbers for
appropriations because it wasn't
just in the database that to
manually gather it that study
revealed an eighteen percent
admission for probation
violation so pretty comparable
to the parole members so not
knowing that that those numbers
even then do not distinguish
between standard and technical
the LFC FIR estimates about
seventy percent being technical
violations so that's that's the
number we're sort of working off
of so New Mexico's probation or
parole supervision process has a
lot of of room for improvement
LFC reports over the last five
six years have really trying to
bring attention to those issues
so we could tailor conditions
and programming better to the
individual we could incentivize
and not just sanctions that use
this the care and not just the
staff we could better match
supervision levels to people's
risk levels this bill doesn't
worry about any of those things
it is a very narrow and targeted
bill looking at one issue which
is to say that the violation
approach we're using is one size
fits all and it treats everybody
elation like a standard
violation or has the potential
to this bill takes a step for.
Four to what those reserves
available all the evidence the
nationwide that's that's coming
available and it tries to target
sanctions better to the type of
violation at issue so it focuses
on technical violations and it
borrows that definition of what
is a technical violation from
Louisiana statute
and and then it codifies
graduated sanctions in response
to technical violations it
changes nothing about how parole
standard violations or
appropriations standard
violations are handled it only
changes the way technical
violations are handled and it
provides for at the earliest
stages non carceral sanctions
non incarceration and only move
toward incarceration on a third
violation and their after
retains the existing options for
both the parole board and to the
point.
So language added to both
sections of also recommends a
target maximum but does not
mandated and also indicated that
sanctions should be commensurate
with the violation of the
underlying crime all serving to
try and limit the overall length
of stay that folks are doing for
a violation
and we have almost wrapping up
here but we have numerous
studies that have found that
community based sanctions are as
effective if not more effective
than incarceration for
addressing violations of
conditions of release South
Carolina uses grade graduated
sanctions and they found their
full revocations fell by forty
six percent a wise use of swift
and certain sanctions on a
similar system probationers were
fifty five percent less likely
to be re arrested seventy two
percent less likely to use drugs
and sixty one percent less
likely to skip appointments when
they received graduated
sanctions so with that we will
stand for questions in madam
chair we have very aware of the
ten minutes and I have a list
here if you don't mind I can
just.
Right off of who can talk for
one minute or two minutes at the
most
Senator you have you'll have are
taking about the minutes of your
time for your presentation so we
have twelve
not need twelve minutes but I
think that I have six people
listed who signed up as
proponents I didn't give it to
them just a minute or two sure
did you can I just go ahead and
some okay Americans for
prosperity Lucas got CA and
please come up here and talk.
To this microphone.
Thank.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Lou got here with Americans for
prosperity and we are in support
of this bill we recognize that
people do bad things and people
are redemptive and they can make
retribution they can make you
know good whole people and when
we give them the opportunity to
succeed and prosper things
happen good things happen and so
we like this bill we're here in
support of this bill not only
does is make good whole people
it also saves the state
significant amount of money so
thank you.
The next step we have both
futures lose health account
posts.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
like compass and I work with
both futures New Mexico as an
organization we work with
individuals who are currently
and formerly incarcerated.
Appropriations often acts of
more as an obstacle to humane
and equitable re integration
into our society all the people
have been physically released
they still feel trapped because
they're unable to obtain certain
opportunities of employment
because technically they're
still on paper still under
scrutinize supervision having
constant check ins and at risk
of being re incarcerated at any
moment for a technical violation
we must support individuals as
they strive to rebuild their
lives we must at the very least
minimize unnecessary violations
of probation and parole that
simply keep our people trapped
in the cycles of incarceration
we ask that you please vote yes
thank you.
And next we have representing
the ACLU to nollie Wilson.
Hi everybody my name's Denali
Wilson I'm here on behalf of the
Celia of New Mexico and as you
heard from the sponsor and the
expert
New Mexico in New Mexico
technical parole violations
account for an extraordinary and
alarming percentage of our
prison population and that means
that such an extraordinary a
share of our law enforcement and
public safety resources are
consistently diverted in order
to imprisonment opt for are
causing you harm not for
committing new crimes but you
know because they forgot to call
their parole officer or because
state you Strucker drugs or
alcohol
and it doesn't take a lot of
creativity to imagine any number
of better uses for these
precious state resources.
What if instead of punishing
people for struggling when they
come home from prison we
invested in their success.
The substantial resources that
are currently expended to
enforce technical parole
violations across the state
could instead be used to expand
transitional out housing options
substance abuse treatment and
other important mental health
resources New Mexico for it
feels like we've put ourselves
in this impossible place where
we fail to provide basic
services to support people's
reintegration when they return
home from prison and then we
punish them when they experience
challenges it's an indefensible
arrangement and it should stop
in this bill is an important
step to making that happen.
If.
Next we have a Rikki Lee Chavez.
Madam chair members of the
committee Rikki Lee Chavez on
behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we stand in support
of this bill probation and
parole are very difficult
systems for individuals to
participate in and complete this
bill seeks to recognize that
one's involvement in the
criminal legal system and
they're proceeding conviction
did not occur spontaneously but
because of other system failures
over periods of time without
support in the forms of
transportation and housing or
treatment for substance misuse
and abuse most individuals on
probation or parole are set up
for failure by creating a
process to define and address
technical probation violations
and technical parole violations
there's a balanced effort to
reduce recidivism and support
the rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals
seeking to leave the criminal
legal system for good thank you
for your time we are just
support.
Next up Diane the cash.
I'm good afternoon cherry
Committee and I and cash SB four
addresses a really crucial
failing of the current practice
for dealing with technical
violations of probation and
parole putting people in jail
for even a short time can have
tremendous negative effects on
an individual but also on their
families and children can
undermine a communities own
interest in supporting the
success of people released from
incarceration I see my own son
struggle with the stresses of
trying to build a life posting
Carson Carceri shin finding
housing getting and holding a
job arranging transportation so
you get to a job to comply with
his conditions of release things
can quickly become overwhelming
mistakes are easily made and
sometimes are the result of
logistical barriers such as
finding child care for your kids
are missing a bus being arrested
and jailed for any length of
time can have devastating
effects on the probation or
their family and their children
even a few days in jail can
cause you to lose your job and I
can't imagine what it would be
like to worry about your kids
safety or even wonder if you
might lose them altogether
essential people who are not a
threat we need to support not
hinder success out here in the
world thank you.
Thank you and finally from the
justice action network Allison
Riley.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Allison
Riley and I'm here on behalf of
could you tear is registered
lobbyists for the justice action
network we stand in support of
this bill nationally the costs
of incarceration for violations
is more than nine point three
billion dollars annually and two
point eight billion of that is
for technical violations and a
smaller example of that is the
ways in a where they limit
incarceration for violations to
no more than ninety days and
that results in a decrease in
incarceration with no change
public safety and a savings of
seventy million dollars annually
we ask you support this bill
thank you.
Okay and with that was stand for
questions.
All that.
I.
It's good it's not have anyone
sign up in opposition on this
bill so we'll go to questions
from committee.
It's interesting.
Yes.
All right we have a motion for
it to pass I assume funds here
would like to be.
In center while we're waiting on
just say thank you for for
bringing this bill I know this
is an issue that you worked on
for many years and and I'm glad
to see the form it is getting to
us as opposed to to how it was
originally filed I think this is
a much better approach
it's going to kind of do a lot
of that.
Thank you for working on.
These issues
And madam chair thank you for
your leadership on this issue as
well.
Senator asked following it.
Knows voting you.
When I yeah we have five okay
we'll go ahead I is there any
objection to the motion for to
pass.
See none so there you have a a
new path.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committed.
Okay.
Right okay.
Representative.
That.
Yes losses were professions
subcommittee right now but we
can go ahead and get started
here your bill's subcommittee
which take official action until
okay great thank you okay so
All right so Senate Bill agency
madam chair.
Committee.
Have a question.
Yeah I was just officers to
sorry center we're going to get
your bill okay do that okay
credit.
I mean right right right right
okay thank you yeah excuse us
will serve only on mention at
this that's fine right you know
Center nose right now.
These procedures we learn so
much.
We table this very quick.
I do think you have a substitute
correct.
Well as it used to for the
right.
We have an amendment
not so.
I have got.
Senate bill one oh two is that
the same thing is done for the
last couple years require semis
to drive right hand lane this
time we added a penalty penalty
for not driving the right hand
lane is there is there allowed
to drive seventy five miles an
hour speed limit.
With that.
Senator would you like to the
this December here.
I don't know if you need someone
need to move amendment for me
all that for that percent
discussion any objections saying
that.
the amendment what it does is we
can catch in the drafting me had
drafted this often other states
of bills in on page one line
eleven it strikes after travel
is insert for truck tractors
setting on page one nineteen for
truck tractors and then apply
twenty three in certain Lujan of
truck tractors and it falls at
two and page one two eight nine
six eight thirteen and just
really defines what a semi is.
Thank you have
signed up.
That
So
so no one side.
Decisions so I had to move the
adoption of the amendment we've
just for discussion.
Attention to the.
The line that's adopted
questions from committee on the.
Center I'm seven.
I think chairman of senators so
I understand what you're doing.
Is no longer to be able to have
to drive as general as possible
within a single lady only.
Practice Representative Madden
madam chair I think.
Correct.
And the only vehicles that need
to.
Is there several at least one
hundred feet.
Well as the last hundred feet
from one vehicle to for changing
lanes.
But also be.
The that's certainly look.
My experience I was with people
how to you of the bill of
rights.
Okay.
Further discussion from
committee.
This will really amendment right
now the minutes been adopted
concerns on the bill okay.
So certainly knows what is the
current status of the law now.
They're supposed to drive in the
in the this creates a penalty if
they don't try to the right in
late.
Well I appreciate that maybe act
but I don't know that it does so
because it the state they're
supposed to drive like handling
and now would require that they
drive and what we.
Is nearly as practical.
which is really saying I have
to.
References you should try really
hard to.
When you say something is nearly
as practical analysis of the
language within the bill.
Really.
So you know when you when you
say the right now they should
we're saying that we're gonna
change that.
As nearly as practicable doesn't
sound like you're going much
further than.
Right now.
Even though you're imposing a
penalty which is good
but I think you so even a lot of
discretion we've got a lot of
exemptions if you choose.
You know you're supposed to
drive over there unless the
traffic conditions for floor the
road conditions require
something differently so anybody
pull over.
He's gonna say well the road
conditions on the flow of
traffic requirement here left
and.
What conditions up hill down
hill right
we'll tell you what you have to
do if there's an accident you're
not gonna be able to do that if
you need to move out of the way
for emergency vehicle for a
yield.
You have to be proactive about
it and then you can just say
demand the semi traffic of a
forty is just ridiculous amount
of wrecks between Gallup in
Albuquerque.
The statistics.
Just in McKinley county alone
the twenty twenty one care
crashes
One to three were fatal.
sixteen forty five of the
crashes were
on I. forty is so it's it's just
a place.
Senator are.
Have a case or to your part of
the state which meant that I've
made that drive quite a bit and
it is very how we travel with
someone traffic it seems to be
the one of things that we should
look at.
Widening that interstate on both
sides it seems like it's pretty
narrow.
Our state in various times to
with me here because of.
Senator DOT is doing that that's
a billion dollars of to add two
lanes this Arizona there's a
line to Albuquerque.
How far along is that.
In the twenty year plan the
state.
The is is the to take a position
on.
usually there in the room I
don't see.
But they do support.
And.
Yes.
that just in.
They're the ones that are going
force it right.
Yeah that they do enforce
currently doing this because and
I got all these emails from
embracing you don't know what
truck drivers I may send you
just a couple semis right did
get pulled over for driving in
the left hand lane and the lower
rate by state cop.
Indeed right of the penalty
under the current law but.
What is one thing you really
think that proposals or should.
Perhaps because she decided that
these are six hundred.
We're going to come into New
Mexico from the results of the
other way around from Texas and
they're not gonna know our law.
Mexico City.
In those requirements.
Unless we do a good job of
signage I with a lot of a lot of
this I do a lot of tracking
cases.
It seems that the.
Lot of this is all part of
driver training and
Commercial driver's license
certifications and
qualifications and so forth so.
Of we see that with pleasure
rest.
Thank you.
Madam chair Senator does this
taken up I know I had some issue
with the legislation brought
last time with concerns about I
mean a lot of times we see
especially right outside of
Moriarty there's that trucks
upper rest often in semis are
coming on the courteous thing to
do is other semis will move over
to the left lane to allow them
to come on because they're
coming in lower speed is that
what the intent of some of this
new languages to allow some
flexibility for that for safety
just to get off on and off
interstates right to allow
traffic to move freely and is
make that for all.
Mr chair Senator that was a huge
concern of mine the last time
you brought the score is you
know I I think a lot of times
and I have a class C. driver's
license I can drive an eighteen
Wheeler and having driven down
the road a lot of people don't
know how to act around semis and
it's very stressful of of being
in that situation and so I think
we allow a little bit of
flexibility for for semi truck
drivers to be courteous to
others is important I also have
a this the question with this
apply to say you just two eighty
five.
Chair Senators four forty and
and Mr chair Senator what is the
the reasoning behind just I
forty.
Madam chair center at the with
the traffic count is on two
eighty five.
Quarter of what it is on I.
forty.
And and Mr or madam chair sorry
see the gavel and and senator so
this wouldn't apply to eighty
two where there's passing lanes
within the passing lanes on on
that road as well.
Madam chair Senator no only
four.
Madam chair Senators as you know
I'm I'm sure you've driven down
in the southeastern part of the
state in the amount of truck
traffic we have down there
there's there's plenty of
highways that you know you you
have the string with ripped and
I feel like sometimes I'm gonna
rip it off the the steering
column because of the traffic in
passing lanes and then he should
be in what lane and so I think
if if we're gonna do this madam
chair and senator on some of
these.
Hi was especially down in the
oil patch we might want to
consider consideration there for
safety that's.
A lot of the vehicular deaths
that occur are down and in that
area so
I thought this was more of a
statewide.
Solution to to vehicle safety so
I think I would have to look
over a little more madam chair
but I assumed that it was for
the entire state.
Under.
Here's supplies whenever roadway
has been divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for
traffic.
So I think if any of us.
And madam chair that that's the
way I read it as well and so
that that was my the the point
of my question is is the way I
read it as a lay person
that would apply to two passing
lanes on on our super twos two
eighty five I have a body that
forms of the ras he's actually
been read twice by semis
instructor.
Done the luck I guess but you
know I was just concerned with
with some of those issues with
with our farming communities
what what this is going to do
for them as well so if it's
going to be a statewide I think
this might have a good impact
in safety especially in our
world oil patch.
You madam chair.
Madam etcetera I mean this again
and and I thought it said I
forty one point but it doesn't
say anything basically.
Thank you madam chair.
So much ignorance here but.
Really first term truck tractor.
To me this set of traffic post
trucks is it defined in the
motor vehicle close.
Madam chair center yes I think
those are defined in the code in
the amendment that that's what
did the instead of all vehicles
now the fixes to truck tractors
in the this the semi Department
the engine is consider the
tractor right.
Okay so so we're talking madam
chair we're talking about these
thank you so much.
But and they're called truck
tractors vehicle.
And so the first part is the
tractor part.
Why would fall trucks act.
The
way the.
This is yes it just seems weird.
So.
Okay that's thank you.
any additional Senator Moores
signature on page two of.
Twenty.
I was.
Course you want to explain to
the public.
The
lights on or.
Mexico this is lost.
What.
Shares of.
Senator Wirth.
I would Madam like to bring in
former senator Rocco for.
At.
From the moment.
Someone from.
Just published its tax.
What senator Wirth.
Along with local county.
The euro set there for sixty
days.
And and madam chair and and the
reason I brought up what we're
Senators Rocco is.
She and I spent a lot of time
discussing that specific.
It'll bill and there's actually
a cartoon usually comes in my
office with.
The Senate Judiciary correct
referenced about texting and
driving I think when the.
Bill died on a I I.
I was the first time we tried it
yes.
I
was.
What are funded in the state for
one of our lowest point this
carriage.
Thank you
sure.
This year Madam chair good you
know just to follow someone
seriously on that last issue it
gets a good mother good
illustration of a good law hello
make senses of public safety and
one this line of force by the
police and therefore
consequently is a law within
tensions but really of little
consequence and I I like you
never pull up to their sexual
work everybody's on the phone.
you know how to get the person
in front of me you know they're
on the tax rate for the lakes
region our system so I I I very
rarely go figure section for the
card is item you're not texting
away and so this is yes it's you
might I raise the point simply
to illustrate that we can pass
laws up here all the time with
good intentions but unless the
police are going to force some
of the prosecutors are gonna
prostitution were spinning our
wheels thank you madam chair.
Representative but while we are
still on that issue Senator
Cervantes.
I do agree that perhaps we
should Google to find for yes
well driving for the first car
I don't I don't like to.
Right here so.
The bill is the rest of us.
Anymore the second car who's in
who's also.
Later that in I mean they're
all.
That's all I care about.
Let's not kid ourselves manager
the cops have their computer
and.
Them and their emailing and
texting away themselves.
We.
And that's all the info I.
That is yes.
Lucien.
All right then motion for at do
have says amended any objection
to that.
This has.
And Senators.
and you have a due pass without
one two three four you do I yes
I for.
What matters.
These.
Please be me busy changing
tires.
No upside I do believe the
longest bill and I've been here
history is the time bill.
Never passed.
I.
Thank you.
Would you to us Centers we've
got the whole committee here now
wow it's really nice to see all
of us together
The.
If we have a stop time of six
point eight the hard stuff so
we've got to bills to be heard.
Yeah I know after.
so the list we are here we might
get a I agree but if it's a hard
stop at six so if I can let me
let's let's hear Senate bill one
thirty three Senator Stewart.
Are you ready to go years I I
think that we only have two
bills left to think Senator is
pretty straightforward and quick
I would think so we can resolve
that and they will finish today
with years Senator Padilla years
got involved a little more
discussion and I'd like to leave
that the end of the day for that
reason so Senator.
Mr Chairman everyone should look
at the definition of truck
tractor in the statute before
you leave today.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee are offering some
of the one thirty three so with
me is part of who is the
executive director of the
independent auto dealers that
right just then the currently I
have more independent auto
dealers in my district anyone
else I also have more of the
used cars in my district central
goes right through it loan this
is the upper boundary so I'm
gonna start with the small story
about four months ago my brother
loaded up his truck with forty
dollars worth of gas part did
overnight someone came and cut
that gas link and siphoned all
the gas out except for maybe a
couple of gallons he could drive
that the two winter tires so we
loaned him Jackson the Honda CRV
three nights later of the Honda
CRV of catalytic converter was
sliced and diced off of cap off
of the Honda CRV he called
police they said thanks glad to
know and then he called his
insurance company and they said
I am will have to pay for that
and they called an urgent was
twenty three hundred dollars.
So we have a huge problem it's
it's not just in New Mexico but
it's it's a it's all over the
country so catalytic converters
are primarily anti pollution
devices that they have three
very expensive metal in them and
that's what the crooks do they
someone for that metal it's two
minutes of work they get three
hundred dollars so that it cost
you anywhere from two three four
five six thousand dollars.
So and what they do is that they
go to a parking lots they go to
use dealers and independent
dealers New Mexico to.
APD's Karloff make good APS's
Karloff they jumped over the
fence twenty minutes later
they've got twenty catalytic
converters and they get away
with it so we've been hit very
hard thirty eight states have
either passed legislation or
considering in the three states
near us Arkansas South Carolina
and Texas require a scrap metal
buyers of used catalytic
converters to maintain records
of purchases and this is what
we're proposing to do now
catalytic converters are already
mentioned in our scrap metal
recycling statute but we wanted
detail that's what the scrap
metal purchasers have to happen
have to show up and so a photo
of the of the person who's
offering it or trying to sell it
the I mean it it's all laid out
it's it's significant
so we want to be able to give
the police the ability to arrest
these people.
In but maybe we did an amendment
in a in.
Senate health of public affairs
the City of Albuquerque has been
told that they can not well all
the cities and counties but they
could not require more reporting
we change the bill so that they
can do more reporting that they
can't do more than what's
required in the bill but they
can they can require other
reporting from the sellers so
that made them happy I don't
know if they're here or not so
let me turn it over yes there
they are let me turn it over to
mark to say anything more.
The madam chair members of the
committee this is truly a crisis
and more reporting with more
rigorous proof of ownership
which this bill provides seems
to be one of the few ways that
will be able to begin to address
it and thank you for your
attention.
So that's where I can talk more
but I can also stop.
Senator here for five minutes
well.
All right we didn't have anyone
sign up as Paul Clement's on
this bill so members of the
committee at your.
In person for it for a eight PP.
Yes if if you'd like her to.
Hi there Senator chair and
Senators it's a pleasure to be
here I am Albuquerque city
councilor Renee grout and I
represent district nine for the
southeast part of the city I've
been getting a lot of calls from
my constituents about catalytic
converter theft since I took
office a year ago I also own an
auto repair shop I see and I see
many of my customers come in
with still in cats.
Thieves may get a few hundred
dollars for a cat at a scrapyard
but they because up to three
thousand dollars worth of damage
in the process of cutting it
off.
I've seen insurance companies
total cars because the cost of
that replacing the cat can be
more than the book value of the
car in two thousand twenty two
thirteen hundred catalytic
converters were reported stolen
in the City of Albuquerque in
the last ninety days alone three
hundred and nineteen catalytic
converters have been reported
stolen within the city limits
that's an average of seventy
seven of these steps per week
more than ten per day we really
have a problem and I think it's
important to note that these
statistics only represent
victims who have filed a police
report several people have told
me that they haven't bothered to
report the theft because they
don't think the police can do
anything about it stealing a
catalytic converter is so easy
and takes little time that I
knew enforcement alone couldn't
do enough to prevent the staffs
so I want to work I wanted to
work with the problem from the
other side of the city by making
it harder for thieves to steal
stolen cats.
I talked to started talking to
the city staff.
About how to do this we thought
we'd add the second hand metal
dealers to the city's
pawnbrokers ordinance the
pawnbrokers ordinance but it
required a scrap yard to take a
thumb print a photo ID and a
picture to this of the seller
along with the picture of the
catalytic converter and upload
them to AP eight online the
database however at at the
moment at this moment the state
law in M. S. A. fifty seven
thirty dash eight prohibits
municipalities from requiring
reporting from the Steelers and
eight online is a reporting
system.
And Senators Stewart did offer
an amendment that was passed in
the previous committee and so
we're so grateful for that I am
the sponsor of twenty two sixty
one a new ordinance that was
introduced to city council in
December it requires scrap metal
dealers to keep records which
will be kept on site and
available for inspection by APD
and if the other state statute
was amended which it has been
then we can start immediately
reporting to eight
It's not attached to a card to
sell it to a scrap yard the
dealer must collect the name
address and date of birth of the
seller and that's listed on
there that's listed on their
photo collective photo ID
thumbprint and take a full face
picture they'd also need to note
the a year making model of the
vehicle with the vin number.
Catalytic catalytic converters
are identified are identifiable
and can be SO when it's brought
to the scrap metal yard they can
see if what what is being
reported the vehicle it can be
then easy easily identified we
also require a copy of the
certificate of title or some
other documentation such as your
registration your your insurance
card to show the seller.
Thank you.
Mr chair which is what the also
statement care sorry that the
federal legislation introduced.
to require that that vehicle vin
number stamped on the catalytic
converter that hasn't passed yet
but just to let people know and
if you want to see exactly what
you have to do is a second hand
dealers fund of page three going
into page four it's it's a
little bit different from what
eighty eight yes eight PP is
required.
Right yes thank you senator
I think the center provisions
of.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator I do have a question is
there been any indication by the
district attorney's that they'll
actually prosecute the
infractions set up in this
legislation.
madam chair Senator Pirtle I
haven't had any conversations
like that it and the last
committee we had.
Full force presence from eight
at ATP officers all saying that
they wanted this I don't think
we have I didn't have any she.
A correction each year we had.
Yeah M. and madam chair if if I
may I know one of the
frustrations just with my local
scrapyard is is they already
keep records for everything that
they the purchase Matt and I've
been a victim of of somebody
stealing precious metals up my
property the photo everything's
there should be an open shut
case the police officer follows
through perfectly fills out the
refer report perfectly and yet
there's a failure to prosecute.
And so I just I do have concerns
we have the conversation of you
know we can pass all the laws we
want but until we really get the
attention of the of the district
attorneys and the prosecutors to
come in and prosecute these
offenses it's just another law
on the books that.
Officers are out there going to
the paperwork people that are
victims of crime are going
through the the issues and going
through identifying their
property and taking time out of
their days and then you know
nothing nothing happens on the
backside and so I I do have that
concern in my my local scrapyard
and they're frustrated because
they're they're doing everything
they're following the book
exactly and yet whenever this
information for the police
officers are are doing their
part and yet it's not being
followed through into
convictions or or.
In the course so I do have
issues there what.
Type of madam chair and senator
what type of information is
going to be kept because there's
there's federal law requirements
with having catalytic converters
is there something where the
state might be holding
information that could then
potentially result in a federal
case of somebody operating a
vehicle without a catalytic
converter Center for answer I
think that your microphone
terminal.
Madam chair I I can't answer the
question about that but I can
tell you that what we're asking
for is page three page four so
we we don't wanna secondhand
metal dealer to purchase a
catalytic converter unless the
seller or offer proof of
identification.
Second hand dealer makes a
record of it to maintain for
three years from the date of
transaction that includes
photocopiers digital image of
the seller officers offer said
invocation date and time name
address phone number signature
of the seller offer license
plate number and vehicle
identification of the vehicle
used to transport the catalytic
converter photocopier digital
image of the legal document
demonstrating ownership by the
seller or offer and photographs
of the Catholic convert to
answer your question what what
we're requiring it sounds like
you're you're a metal dealer
probably does most of this it's
very frustrating you know when
when the catalytic converter was
taken off of the the the the
Honda CRV my partner called in
native police report now sits
mean I wanted at least some
fingerprints take under some
effort but you know we we all
know about the issues around
Albuquerque eight feet deep so
now at this done so I share your
concern but never the less I
think it's important that we try
to bring them in and madam chair
and senator I I appreciate the
the intent I also know that a
lot of our vehicles that are
older on the road and there's
not many vehicles left on the
road that don't have catalytic
converters and one of the major
issues I see as a mechanic with
some of the older vehicles
catalytic converters end up
getting clogged up or plugged up
and causes many issues with
performance of the vehicle fuel
mileage and things like that in
a very common thing for for many
people who can't afford it and
pay a hundred dollars for new
catalytic converter because most
of these vehicles are only worth
about fifteen hundred dollars is
what it's gonna do to them
and the the the issue and and
everything that they're going to
have to bring forward to prove
that they are the lawful owner
to use that to.
In order three hundred that they
might be able to recoup from
selling their old catalytic
converter in purchased a new one
or if they even choose to put
one back on and and so I think I
have a lot of concern there that
although we're trying to go
after the criminals there are
quite a few people who do seller
catalytic converters in a in a
honest way I mean we we don't
even off require a photocopy of
a a license to vote but yet to
sell your own property we're
we're going to require that and
I I I think it might
affects those that are are
trying to comply with the law
and I understand the intent and
it is a huge issue it's too easy
to go down there with us
although I have one in Milwaukee
that I completed less than two
minutes madam chair and senator
but I do have some concerns with
those and and then madam chair
and senator if if I may there's
also an aftermarket now the cool
thing to do and I've actually
done it is taken and square body
Chevy the eighties model put in
a newer style motor and actually
sell aftermarket catalytic
converters that don't have the
numbers on them
with this applied to those and
how would somebody proved that
they had a legal right to own an
after market catalytic
converter.
Women chair Senators first well
the catalytic converters don't
have the vin numbers on them yet
to me that's a bill in Congress
that they have the state so
but essentially if you're.
Now if you're the owner
you can prove it through these
this documentation you know I
mean it's the same documentation
but if you're the owner it's
your car you can shows it's
yours if you bought it at center
of so I don't see how this could
you know what impact a seller
that was a real seller and and
madam chair and senator if if I
put a catalytic converter my
eighty two Chevy that income
factory with one but I try to
take this after market catalytic
converter years later to turn in
it might be turned away because
eighty two Chevrolet pickups
incomes catalytic converter so
therefore you can't prove that
you should be in ownership of I
know that seems kind of strange
but there's probably a thousand
of those types of vehicles just
in Travis county alone where
people have upgraded the motors
and with fuel injection and and
all the electronic controls and
things so I do think there's
some some issues with that and
and some concerns that that I do
have.
That's all I have here.
Thank you senator Senator about
thank you madam chair was a.
Thank you senator I was reading
on page three one of the
requirements of the secondhand
metal dealer some not purchaser
of the world otherwise receive a
catalytic converter and less
hello and section when the
seller offer presents identifica
proof of identification what is
that identification.
Madam chair and senator.
Then that's their own
identification they are their
license.
We're getting into the weeds
down may need help from other I
I have a I have a maybe a
suggestion madam chair and
senator there is a defined term
within that section of the law
called personal identification
identification document and what
it what it says are in section
each of of of that section which
is it says that that is a
driver's license military
identification card or passport
issued by the United States or
by another country and
recognized by the United States
so the defined term in there and
it might do a little bit better
and narrowing what this
identification is so if if miss
madam chair and senator few be
amenable to a amendment we could
simply add that were at those
words
and what it would look like
would be
presents proof of and before on
the on page on page three line
fourteen before identification
personal identification and then
after the word identification
document so it's a personal
identification documents of
identification.
And that is page three line
fourteen.
And if the it appears again on
page three line nineteen of were
before the word identification
with that personal and after the
word identification would add
document and then you would have
a defined term within that
section of law that tells you
exactly what kind of information
you could receive and if if
you're amenable to that I would
move that amendment.
So the seller for offer present
spruce up proof of personal
identification documentation
that doesn't quite well we could
strike proof of I'm sorry to say
that presents a personal
identification document.
Would be specifically gives the
department the authority to sign
what documents will count yes
I'm page three of course this is
currently.
The the.
This is Department shall
promulgate rules that more
specifically described the type
of documentation required you
for a second hand metal dealer
make agent transaction described
in the section and and they do
Senator I I just I see that
madam chairman Senator but this
is a term that's defined it
narrows it I think it makes your
bill better I think it provides
front end protection madam chair
Senator for your bill that
requires the second hand metal
dealer to look for something
more specific we've already
talked a little bit madam chair
and senator about some of the
issues with enforcing some of
these things I think this
provides a front end protection
to the bill we're we're we're
requiring that of the secondhand
metal dealer where the those
identifications are legitimate
and issued by the state itself
that we do not showing up with a
birth certificate or something
like that.
I don't have any problem with
the with the amendment I don't
think it's necessary but I don't
have any problem with that I've
finally found one place where's
the secretary of the second
instance would be on page three
line nineteen
were identification appears we
put personal from of
identification documents after
identification and that's the
only place those are the only
two instances I can see.
Madam chair I I think I need to
chat with my the expert here
just from.
And senator I will note that
accepting the center of this
moment we just make this
consistent with fifty seven
thirty four major requires that
someone who's trying to sell any
of regulated material to
secondhand metal dealer also has
to show that personal
identification documents so the
thank you for this session.
All right so I guess it's
friendly I didn't have a copy of
the bill I was looking at the
one that has the amendment sonic
so to tell me once more so it's
a storyline regional mill rate
without the amendment it's going
to be found on page three.
And so the new verbiage would
start line thirteen the seller
offer provide presents a
personal identification
document.
Striking proof.
So be a personal identification
document and then the other
instance would be online
nineteen and for FY dedication
personal.
And following identification
document.
On the amendment.
Our
system is quest for survival
within
We subsection B. that.
For that defined term personal
identification documents we
don't do the.
What would probably rules to the
fact that the fish Department.
I I I I I think I am I I'm happy
I'm pleased with the amendment
presenting I think that
madam chair and and Senator Ivy
Soto I think moving into that
could affect other documents
within the new material that are
being collected and that's not
my intent at all money is
consistency within the statute
but I'll leave it to you to
present that amendment if you'd
like madam chair and senator.
So madam chair we're fine with
Senator boxes Justin's on page
three.
You have yes all right is there
any further debate on the
amendment.
Is there any objection to it
often.
Seeing them that amendment is
adopted.
Senator popping stuff.
I have nothing else thank you
madam chair thank you senator
for doctor.
Thank you madam chair so
first of all you know Senator I
hope my comments don't in any
way disrespected misfortune I
misfortune of vehicle siphon gas
the whole thing
I I bring it up because you you
for.
And I've had strong
disagreements about the impacts
of crime on people's lives and
you've been a repeat victims of
crime you describe it to them so
I'm sorry about that this for
two million it's just a chance
to say in the insurance pay for
it I'm not crying
and I I know you're not and and
I appreciate the fact that
interest but it goes as we've
all heard it's a terrible
inconvenience is so my mom
really have a question when
individual takes a catalytic
converters the vehicle disabled
by that yes I mean so we could
try that three or four blocks
but you can't.
It depends also sent more
expensive vehicle sessions let
mark say this our damage more
than other vehicles so his cost
twenty three hundred dollars to
fix
and that there are other things
on the vehicle that had to be
fixed not just where the
catalytic converter was really
plain terms will be a cool start
one of a kind of a commercial
movie at his debt you're saying
yes you're saying no so it
depends depends on the type of
vehicle.
Would you just tell me what
metals are in a catalytic
converter just got him right
here on those no there's only
three I don't have them
memorized just a minute.
Councillor Representative might
be able to help yeah general
counsel Graham lenient and.
The HSA I can give you an
example of the avid customer
Mexico Toyota for yes.
Catalytic converter with cut the
thief also cut the hoses and the
oxygen sensors for going so he
could drive his car ran out.
Yes that's consistent will we'll
talk with it depends on the
vehicle and I mentioned so
sloppy job you do the Senator
Pirtle does is with us also.
I I call myself a farmer you
resolve also to grow as well
time of bailing water what
marketwired dot right at the
point now.
Well thank you fixated you but
the.
But yeah it depends I guess on
the car and and ensuring that
your exam differences the Prius
because again I think it's a
matter of time before we start
seeing us of theft of metals
involved in battery electric
vehicles right in the we listen
to a lot of issues about the
source of those metals coming
out of Congo I guess by the
slave labor child labor involved
in those of the different
subject for today but the level
of technical support they become
more fun place we're gonna see
this expanding up lotus note
that we as I've got this right I
think we do something similar
with us already we've done it
with aluminum
copper wiring I think before we
see that for as these models
become more and more precious
Act you can't go anywhere
incentive for you can't go and I
can't by copper wire at home
depot or something without
locking Q.
because a lot of depth with and
Mr chairman we're we're amending
that section of the law that
also deals with copper the
recycle metal Representative
state itself becomes we've we've
done this with because right
because folks are going to order
the minimized really because and
selling the next day and those
are very price very valuable as
well do so we've done this in
the inside portion we have to
continue to do it just a
specific question on the page
for among the things you're
asking to be collected.
So program the I stepped out of
the room but I don't think you
all worked on this part of.
The requires a photocopier did
Vigil image of the legal legal
document demonstrating ownership
by the seller or offer.
was a discussion about this I
don't know if there was any so a
legal legal documents
demonstrate ownership of what
there's not gonna be able
there's a lot of it
documentation legal ownership of
Catholic converters and the
reserves of the.
If there is a there is an I'd
suggest you to eliminate that
requirement because you know
again somebody they say well the
state losses I've got to collect
a photocopy or do the job of a
legal document demonstrating
ownership.
But.
There was a would be I can't
imagine there would be any such
document I have a catalytic
converter option my car business
document that shows that only
that catalytic converters Mr
Chairman this is for the
vehicle.
that's not really clear when you
look at the list of list begins
on page three subsection these
assess the secondhand metal
delusional not purchase or
otherwise receive echo a
converter less and that goes
back to do it says.
this.
Hello sorry so there's a program
to the second half metal dealer
makes a record transaction we
mated with three years that show
includes of the record of the
transaction shall include the
goodies and photocopier Division
to a digital image of legal
document demonstrating questions
mean I'm so you're saying Sir so
it's implied that I guess it
would be the ownership of the
vehicle but doesn't really say
that.
maybe that's self evident maybe
that's too to thank you.
you Mr chairman an affidavit of
the ownership is usually what's
offered here for what's called
for and that would show the
ownership of the of the vehicle.
Got you because you're satisfied
with I want to raise the issue
because we look at some programs
do requires as part of the
transaction the recording of the
license plate number and the vin
of the vehicle used to transport
the catalytic converter that
seems we want to find where the
scripts are they don't know who
they are we don't know who's
doing this no they're they're
doing a lot they're not just
doing it occasionally they're
jumping into mark pals car lots
and doing twenty to time in
twenty minutes so we want we
want to know who they are what
they're driving what their
license plates is what they look
like
because you know.
I I spoke with you and I don't
want to step in and to me or
anybody I know and love so I I
just that's a program features
trouble because a single and
because this is a photocopy of
the legal document demonstrating
ownership
it's not clear to me that that's
the vehicle but maybe clear you
and sensors are going to be such
a document for the catalytic
converter maybe that alone is
enough I've got a again wonder
maybe somebody who's
legitimately selling these is
going to carry around a copy of
their documentation of ownership
of the vehicle but is that what
they're I'm sorry for the
sheriff's registration straight
in the car right but I I Senator
we look at the preceding
paragraph you're asking for a
recording of the information in
which the vehicle was
transported the catalytic
converter which I get every
trying to track somebody down
But within so you're asking for
that information to the
transporting vehicles in the
second next paragraph is legal
documentation of the ownership
of that vehicle and meals that
meal we're sometimes people
don't have a document showing
ownership of the vehicle.
Less it's registration and
insurance you got cares that
maybe the.
For my cars are owned by the
bank.
So.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator Ivey Soto some.
That question some of those.
Let's see what
senator Sanchez trying to touch
on.
The second half metal filler
just a second and middle dealer.
Receive entire vehicles for
parts of the.
Well.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
above generally they'll often
take the date they operate in
tandem often.
The traditional junk yard in the
metals.
And and so is the is the intent
of this.
Legislation part of reduce
isolation is that.
If I bring in a vehicle.
That contains a family catalytic
converter in a month other
things.
The second handle Taylor before
the able has to the
do this is with regard to the
catalytic converter that's in
the vehicle but I'm pretty.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto hi
I believe what the rule is
focused on there are any rules
that you have to prove ownership
for an entire vehicle this
specifically is for separated I
believe catalytic converters.
Okay.
And so I guess I'm.
That's but I think I think
that's that's part of the what.
Senator Cervantes was
Was not was was not sure which
way the wind for ten and I'm.
Since you have shop purchased or
otherwise receive catalytic
converter.
I'm just wondering if if you
need to modify their than.
Hello that catalytic converter
that comes as part of the or
something I don't know.
That's really where the
practitioners that's fine.
Right may I have a forty year
experts find in the.
Yes.
Chair.
Senator there is an auto
recyclers though that they have
something separate in an
apartment in Albuquerque or in
our ordinance now the cookie we
have that noted out separate so
if it when they come in with the
with the if if the recycling the
whole vehicle they're going to
have they're going to have the
that that have the information
so it's it is a separate I
separate ideal this is for just
the catalytic converter if it
comes in separate and I.
One of the reasons why we're
doing this is that the the
person that's accepting that
catalytic converter they
unknowingly sometimes are taking
it from even they don't know it
so we are trying to keep them
from being part of that crime is
yes.
And I'm sure and then
I'm worthy of the attention of
those yeah and I'm I'm not gonna
talk to.
And but but I would ask that
the sponsor along with people
that she works with just.
Re read that for this to the
floor.
To make sure that words or
otherwise receive.
Dozens state where a vehicle
from the that has.
A little over in.
Because they are receiving a
pallet or at that time.
And so that so you all will take
a look at that.
I think I think that.
Thank you.
This call is from the committee.
Representative I'm some I just
want to.
Thanks to that page three.
Number ten actually that's one
that.
What the panelists converter
that is not part of an entire
motor vehicle it's already
identified.
Right and that is
Chair and senator.
That is clear for subsection
eighty.
That is not clear with regard to
subsection do.
Because subsection are
definition.
So so that's what I'm saying is
you just may want to take a look
at okay with that yeah.
Thank.
Senator all just know in cancer
grant I think you said that the
ordinance that you are proposing
would also require thumbprints
under this bill you're not gonna
be able to do that because under
this bill a local can can
require reported as long as
reporting requirements are no
more stringent than the
reporting requirements for
regulated material pursuant to
the provisions sale percent
metals Act.
That that does not
but does not allow for taking
bigger prints for point purposes
out to some for for you all to
be aware of when you're you're
passing Senator.
Thank you madam chair I do have
a an amendment
on page four striking subsection
tired.
Madam chair that's unfriendly
amendment this is current
language right now I think it's
important that the department to
be allowed to.
we would not just.
Senator.
I have.
And madam chair that is correct
I'm sorry yes page for madam
president.
Line three through five.
To I guess I would have to to.
At the end somewhere else but.
In the letter.
Yes so madam chair Senator
Pirtle week we consider this a
crucial part of this so that
would be an unfriendly and.
Yes there
Addition and a member what's
your point.
In that.
And madam chair I can expand on
a little bit I I think this is
for me really that the sticking
point
I think this this paragraph
alone is what kind of makes it a
little bit difficult for people
that are trying to abide by the
law and sell a catalytic
converter that they own I really
don't know how somebody's going
to find a photocopy or digital
image of a legal document
demonstrating ownership of a car
part the these are things that
can be removed from the vehicle
in a way that doesn't involve
cells also that they can do
and I think it may force a lot
of this to the black market I
know Justin in Roswell there's
people that advertise on
Facebook marketplace regularly
that come up from el Paso.
They buy up these things from
from people transport the del
Paso cellum there and that it
may force people to do that as
opposed to just using our local
metal shops and doing it in a
legal form when they are legal
owner so I think this this
section alone ads.
The step that that makes it
almost impossible for people to
legally sell.
There catalytic converters.
Sure to.
Madam chair.
Refer back to the Department
promulgating rules.
I still think that's important
but you know the you your your
registration your.
Your insurance card being those
are easy to do and
You know we just need
documentation that the seller
owns the car.
Owns the catalytic converter so
that is an important part of
this.
And madam chair if I may there's
there's many mechanic shops
muffler shops that get hired to
replace catalytic converters and
they don't on the vehicle.
They can't prove ownership of
the vehicle so I think that may
cause cause some issues that
they're in possession of it
legally and may have come to be
in possession of an illegal
manner but yet they cannot prove
through legal documents that
demonstrating ownership of of
such alright alright.
The madam chair Senator Pirtle
one of the things about
allowing.
The the department could allow
for example an affidavit they
could accept transaction
documents particularly from a
shop who shows we did this work
for this vehicle.
And we replaced it I I believe
that you know the department's
promulgating appropriate
proof of ownership including a
simple affidavit which they
often do in these cases for
other scrap metals in Addis
station is often not so I I
don't think we should over
complicated and allow the
department to use the same kind
of fairly simple requirements
that they have for other scrap
metals.
You're making that motion yes
chair I would move that online
to after the semi colon we at
and and then strike subsection
E. in its entirety and re letter
accordingly.
Additional discussion on the and
and then my correct Senator
that's my family and it's
definitely and I'm family from
would you receive the.
Thank you it would be on page
four line to after this and
Michael and insert and.
Then strike subsection E. in its
entirety and remain re letter
accordingly.
Okay I'll just say as senator I.
I think the census sounds like
the use of affidavits is a
pretty accepted
practice in this area and that's
something that can easily be
used to satisfy this
requirement.
I've I've I can't support the.
Two hundred.
Welcome.
Mr chair.
I think it's gonna be closer to
probably do that wonders Senator
perlu it may madam chair Senator
we would you would you entertain
the notion of adding the word
affidavit do that Representative
the so the photocopy double
digital image a legal document.
Or affidavit demonstrating
ownership and and madam chair
Senators at mind reading to your
list of skills because at the
end of the day that if we added
affidavit money my concern is
with the legislature that's
intent but yet we're depending
on the department to do
something after the past and the
the role of this committee is to
ensure that the right so I would
entertain the idea the idea of
adding the word affidavit.
Yeah maybe of the laser concerns
of Senator do not eliminate the
language and so she's able to
feel more comfortable it may not
I can't imagine given from women
if you were to implement it that
way that's a friendly amendment
if you're leaving do and I'm
just adding or affidavit
friendly in the curve of that is
all for the.
Thank you madam chair I would
agree with that.
Three state your motion.
I believe madam chair line for.
After the word celery would
insert comma.
Affidavit of ownership.
Etcetera etcetera I think you're
page four line for I think if
you just after the word document
insert the words or affidavit.
That would create a photocopier
digital image of a legal
document or affidavit
demonstrate ownership by the
seller or offer an amendment
that's correct this with loans.
And I make the motion.
is there
thank.
That's from the amendment is
there any objections that.
Then that amendment is adopted.
Background of the.
And it is there any incentive on
real quick it in conjunction
with the amendment madam chair
and senator that we did earlier
I it would just be fixing the
title to the bill online fifteen
page one one fifteen before
identification personal and
after identification document in
the title just to clean it up
for this and for.
Another family then.
is there any special moment the
objections the.
The system.
Any more discussion on the bill
COVID.
Etcetera etcetera.
Yeah so this is.
It realized.
And that is not part of it in
terms of the vehicle.
Right of way they wanted to look
at pay for.
For.
For the words
Of the data for.
Any more.
Reductions in measurement yet
you know the only part of the
discussion I have is I'm looking
at the former chair of the house
Judiciary Committee that back
just smiling ear to ear about
the fact that he doesn't do this
anymore.
This is look this looks more
more like the house Judiciary
Committee all.
This is not of all thank you and
to the state house members are
asked.
For the past Senator Moores
Is there any.
The motion.
Seeing I'm you have do fans.
One of one suggestion I might
wanna roll all this into this
because of all the amendments
from the prior committee and
this committee is gonna be
really hard to track that's fine
thank you so.
That's that's the.
So the new motion would be a do
that do not pass Senate Bill.
She's going to I'm not gonna
make
it E. I hate presenting before
us so.
My my apologies to Senator
o'neill centennial we're gonna
roll you with the first on
Friday I thought this is going
to be fast and easy and we we
get that and years
you can't sing nothing is fast
and easy Senator.
You know that.
I'm sorry those of you that are
here of my apologies we'll see
you Friday thank you very much.
