Senate Bill 25 or 95, um, please
join us again on Friday.
Otherwise, we will hear the 1st
3 bills, please note if you have
the agenda handy. I've, um,
adopted a new kind of
designation by putting the
letter P in parentheses after
certain bills, which means we
will hear the bills, uh, by the
sponsor advocates, uh,
presenters and uh opponents, but
we will not take a vote on a
particular bill.
The reason for that principally
is that we may be trying to roll
several bills into one, bill
package, and or we may be
waiting for house bills or
conflicting bills to have here,
so we want to do the work of
hearing the bills, uh, engaged
in the committee and debate,
taking care of all the public
hearing component of bill, but
then waiting on a vote until we
perhaps we have the bill in
consolidation. So for example,
my agenda today had scheduled
Senate bill at 25 and 95 with
Senator Brantly both.
dealing with fentanyl. So
sometimes it'll make sense to
hear different, uh, different
bills on a common topic, and so
we'll schedule things that way
too, but if we get another
fentanyl bill, we may bring all
those together in the group as
well too, so that's kind of the
method to all of this again,
the, the procedure is a little
bit new. You don't see it in
many other committees, but we
did it last session, I think
effectively to have a
presentation and hearing and
then then delay the vote until
perhaps um we have a better
picture of the whole.
The whole thing, so, uh, in the
event we have today, uh, Mr.
Harden when I recognize and
appreciate.
Miss Casados who's here uh ICWFD
today. I, I think it's wonderful
that she's here and she's
hearing the presentation, um,
and I'm sure we'll have an
opportunity to hear from her
sometime in this session soon.
In in the governor's state of
the state, she did make
reference to legislation that
she would be proposing with
regard to CYF and D, I, um,
Contacted and have had the
opportunity to speak with
Governor's staff, a couple of
staff members including uh her
general counsel, and, um, and
let them know that we're open
and eager to see whatever
legislation they'd like to
propose it relates to see where
FDA was when I spoke with her
yesterday, said the legislation
they're still working on, so
that's why we don't have that
joined with the hearing today.
It's not to exclude anyone or to
hear only one side, for those of
you that are new to the
committee, my, my practice is
much like any lawyer you'd
expect, which is, I like to.
hear both sides of of issues. So
I, I, and you'll see that with
me even during the interim, I,
I'm prone to having both sides
presented together so that we
hear both sides, and that's the
way lawyers kind of discern the
truth in some respects, and it's
also very useful in my
experience for them to hear each
other, uh, oftentimes they don't
listen to each other or hear
each other, so, so uh this is
not ideal to have only um
One perspective of the, of the
CYFD um.
circumstances, but I thought
it'd be good for everyone to
have a history, particularly
with all the new members to the
committee, so unless there's any
objection, we'll go to Mr. Hart.
I think I got this turn. There
we go. Thank you, Senator. I
wanted to introduce.
Um
Doctor George Davis, who was to
my right, um, and we'd like to
start today with um some really
basic.
Basic things that we can share,
um, Doctor Davis has me say a
few things I've been practicing
law for about 36, 37 years, I
started my career.
Working for CYFD a long, long
time ago.
And I and my law firm dedicate
most of our law practice to
children at risk children,
children who are in foster care
and in lots of other um.
Situations where
Um, that, that are not ideal for
them. That's what we do, um, and
So
Um, with that, I, I think
because we wanted to sort of
Give some background to where we
think we are, where, where the
state is with COFD. Doctor
Davis, um, is a psychiatrist.
He's a, a child psychiatrist,
um, boarded and with decades of
experience working inside CYFD.
And um working with most
vulnerable children, children
with the biggest and most
serious problems um throughout
the state. He has been a
resource to this body, as well
as to um
Policymakers throughout the
state for decades, and I think
for us to begin, it makes sense
for him to give you a
perspective from the give his
give his perspective.
On
What it, what it's like to be a
child who is um
Finds herself in foster care
involuntarily, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
can't tell how loud this is.
That sounds right. Good.
Um
Uh, Mike asked me to talk about
um CYFD.
And I
Something that doesn't sound
right. There we go. Is that OK?
Uh, um, talk about CYFD, which
is, you know, that's a big field
to run around in and um but
what.
We want to present is just what
the fundamentals of, um, child
protection amount to, and what
the fundamentals of a child
protective service um are uh are
required for that service to, to
function. And so, that is
exactly what I'm doing, uh, like
the material that I want to talk
about, uh, are the basic
outlines of what child
protective service needs to do
and to be and to have in order
to function, um.
It's not, um, I, I realize I'm
talking about CYFD with CYFD
here is, but I'm not really
talking about the
administration, um, and I'm
really not talking about the
administrative services or even
the the structure of CYFD what
I'm talking about is uh child
protective services, how they
work and how um they can, how
they can function, so most of
what I'm saying is.
Not only non
partisan, it's non-contested,
it's mutually agreed, um, and
it's even incontestable. And so
my first point.
Um
Is that if uh if you're gonna
talk about child protective
services, what, what needs to be
established first is what
exactly are they doing and what
what are the needs of the child
that falls into foster care.
Um, any child and I, I've
repeated this 1000 times and it
always seems to be um
Um, not completely clear, it's
the easiest thing to forget is
that what is a child actually
need? What is any child actually
need. More than anything else,
more than anything else at all,
um, except for food and water, a
child needs a primary caretaker,
and that primary caretaker is a
is a guardian, a protector, uh,
and also a nurturer of that
child and so what you're talking
about when you talk about child
protective services, uh, as
you're talking that in some
sense that has gone awry, and I
don't mean that to be pejorative
to the to the parents who find
themselves in that situation,
but it's, it's either it can be
substance abuse, poverty is a
contributor, but poverty is not
a reason um that individuals
fall into child protective
services, but in some sense that
primary caretaking.
Function um has um
has, has not worked and, and
consequently, um, the, the
overall mission, the one that's
most clear about child
protective services, um, is
that, um,
Uh, that either their their goal
is to either repair that.
Uh, and make that function work
and somehow shore it up and keep
that child in that essential
critically essential kind of
relationship, um, or
Uh, else to take that child, and
if they take that child, uh,
that means that there has to be
uh a substitution, and so so the
the main
Work of CYFD of child
protection, whether it's uh
whether it's in Texas or
Connecticut or wherever it's
just it's just somehow make that
determination, uh, and when they
make that determination to if,
if that child is going to be
taken into custody, um, to make
that determination and then
provide a substitute for that.
That's the overall function. I'm
trying to be, I know I'm, I'm
laying groundwork that is
obvious, but sometimes that's
forgotten. Uh, the, the
essential critical developmental
needs of a child, uh, are rested
and vested in that primary
caretaker.
Now
We'll talk about consequently
the the way that's accomplished,
again, in New Mexico and.
Any other state, uh, is first,
there has to be a, a functioning
capacity for receiving those
complaints, so there's
allegations of me of abuse or
neglect or maltreatment in any
sense, that is, that is, um,
nullifying the parental um.
Care for that child, uh, in New
Mexico, that's sky that's uh
that's statewide um.
Um, central intake and statewide
central intake receives those,
um, receives those complaints,
receives those allegations
somehow, um.
Determines whether there's merit
to those, uh, and if there is
merit, moves those on um for
investigation, um, as there,
there's so much background, even
in that one step, it's like,
what do you rule in, what do you
rule out, how fast does the
investigation take place. All of
that is determined by um
policies and procedures within
CYFD.
Um
And the investigation, uh again,
uh those investigators who do
that work, it's 24/7, it's hard
work, some, you know, the, when
I talked to investigators and
when other people talk about it,
it can't be dangerous work, it's
contested, it's unpopular, uh,
but it's very hard work, uh, the
whole program, the, the whole
child protective service is a
24/7, um, service that is
Not, actually, and there's
reasons for that. When you think
about the job of CYFD, um, it
has probably the hardest job in
state government. I think that's
without a doubt, and having
worked with them all this time,
they, the, the children who come
in to see YFD uh are oftentimes.
Damaged by the either previous
abuse or neglect, and so
consequently, not only is their
initial job contested, but that
the population that they have
and that it falls into their
care in custody is also um
compromised in in however you
want to look at it, that's true,
even if uh even if it's a
newborn coming out of the
hospital, there is compromise
there. I mean, I can look at the
numbers, I think the
From CYFD's own website.
Um
At any given point in time.
At any given point in time,
well, in the in the most in the
in the.
Most recent count that they have
on their website and their
website um is uh www. Together
we thrive New Mexico andM.org.
Together we thrivenm.org. I
highly recommend that. It's a
really good website and it's uh
it's relatively new. They list
the number of children that they
have in custody currently is
around 2067. Um, the, um,
That is at a point in time, uh,
over time, um, those the the
account will be much higher than
that because there are children
who come in and out of custody,
so like in I think 2019, it was
380,080 that were in were in
custody at any given time, that
diminished as this lawsuit got
got started, um, there were less
children in custody, but that's
still at any given time, there's
2000.
plus or minus uh in in their
custody.
In some form or fashion, and
there's
Usually 3000 that that see them
over the course of the.
If an investigation determines
that, um, that the family is not
able to be.
Remediated, salvaged, repaired,
um, and custody is determined to
be necessary, there's a legal
process for that to make sure
that the parents, uh, and the
child, and everyone involved in
that case has a legal process
and so there's that there is the
courts are involved, there's
attorneys that that pursue that
there's a timeline as to when
those various deadlines have to
occur, um, and it's very strict
guideline, I think 3 days after
a child is taken into custody,
they have to.
be uh uh filed a court a uh
order has to be filed with the
court and then by 10 days, there
has to be a determination of
whether or not that custody will
be um continued. All that legal
process is simply like I said,
to guarantee the rights of the
parents of the child, uh, and to
give some kind of legal warrant
to the um to the state so that
they can act as the parent and
the guardian of that child.
Um
Once that child is in custody,
there needs to be a primary
caretaker. Again, this is very
generic. I'm not even naming
these, I'm talking about the
function of a functioning child
protective service. Once that
child is taken into custody,
there has to be at least one
person, one worker, one
caseworker in in New Mexico,
it's a permanency worker who is
the primary contact for that
child, accesses services.
I think, uh, spearheads the uh
Uh, spearheads the treatment
plan.
Um, and, uh, becomes the primary
contact for that child, even if
that child is out of state, um,
that, that person, uh, is
functions somewhat as the
on-site guardian. Um, the other.
Necessary, essential function,
um, that, um that is required at
that point is that child has to
be placed somewhere and and
another set of workers, which in
New Mexico uh are called
placement workers cleverly
enough, as as you might expect,
and the placement workers have
more to do than simply.
Um
Putting that, putting that child
in a placement or finding a
placement for that child,
they're also in charge of
recruiting foster parents,
whether those are family kin,
foster parents, whether those
are non-relative foster parents
as supporting those foster
parents, supporting the process
while that child is in custody.
Um, it's a big job, it's a full
time job. And, and that's
separated from the permanent.
Um
CYFD recently, um, that.
I'll come back to this later,
but, um, but recently created a
uh an entire service, an entire
service division is one of the
main pillars of uh of CYFD to be
family services, and family
services come into play. um,
first, if there's going to be an
opportunity to reunite that
child, hopefully.
And that happens, um, sometimes
that can be speedy, sometimes
that can be a long time in in
taking place and also if um.
Uh, if that child is is not
gonna be reunited, um, that
there may be other children in
the home and family services,
uh, need to be in contact and
providing support for those
families, because obviously they
need families, but the goal,
once again, um, not to forget
that goal. The goal is to give
that child a primary caretaker,
and that primary caretaker might
be the family, and uh there's
there's figures available, I
think they're even on their own.
website about how many children
are returned into the home each
year, how many stay in custody
and what the duration of those
stays are, uh, and, and where
those child uh children are
staying as well. Not all the
children are going to um.
Match with a foster family, it
should.
Um, in my own mind, uh, the very
best thing, the very best
substitute for a uh family that
um is not able to care for their
child or has some problems that
are that are intrinsic and
overwhelming, um, the best, the
best alternative to that is a
substitute caretaker in the form
of a foster parent. Uh, again,
Oh, is that better?
Really?
OK.
How's that? Is that better?
Um
OK.
low like that. Is that better?
OK, good. OK.
Um, I lost my place, but CYFD is
organized. If you, if you look
on their website, you're gonna
see that they're organized into
3 major, what they call pillars,
those pillars, uh, one is
juvenile justice, one is
protective services, and one is
family services. Family services
was made a uh an entire pillar
on its own to demonstrate the
fact that, um, that CYFD uh
hopes to
Care for the family as as well
as the child because without
that family, um, there is,
without either that family or a
substitute family, that child is
lost.
And I don't mean actually
misplaced, but I mean,
developmentally um uh delayed or
uh or prevented from a normal
kind of developmental course.
When um I was, I have to admit,
I I was uh.
I came to the department in 1993
after it had been formed, um by
the King administration.
And uh at that time, it, uh, I
talked to people in other states
and it was the envy of um
It was the, it was the envy of
the nation in some ways because
it was so organized, uh, such as
to have child protective
services, behavioral health
services, uh, and, uh, uh,
juvenile justice all enclosed
within one agency. Now, for
those
3 pillars, there are a number of
supports, um, and those supports
are move across all the
different pillars, first is off
the tribal affairs to make sure
that
Um, all of the services at CYFD
offers are also offered to the
tribes and the pueblos and the
nations.
Um, there's behavioral health
services, they don't.
Provide their own services, but
they do offer consultation on
all the kids and all the
treatment plans and all the
needs for the children, so, uh,
they function as uh as
consultants.
Um, there's training department
for the for the training of the
um um of the child protection
workers.
Uh, and then there's also a
legal department, which includes
not only the, the general
counsel, but also includes the
child, um, children's court, uh,
Uh, attorneys that are working
to run that timeline and present
this case to the courts. So,
having said that, um, which is
all kind of like basic 101.
Um
The question is,
What at this time is standing.
Mike will talk about the uh the
Kevin has lawsuit, but the, but
the things.
Um, that stand in the way of
that. If, if a child protective
services.
Um
Only can function with adequate
staff and, and not just adequate
numbers of staff and adequate
experienced staff who understand
children or understand child
development, who understand the
law.
Um
And the, the, uh, one of the
things that keeps the, this,
this particular child protective
service from
Functioning is the uh lack of uh
adequate staffing.
And I'm not even gonna get into
why that is, but I will say um
that retention is a problem,
recruiting is a problem, partly
because it's a hard job, um,
partly because, uh, people quit
for a number of reasons and
they've this department is
investigated that.
The second
Problem, um, with the way that
CYFD currently functions is a
lack of placements, and as you
can tell,
All of these, uh, the, the
staff, the staffing problems,
the lack of placements, um, and
the lack of services. All those
are intertwined and related. Um,
the lack of placement means that
they might take a kid into
custody, but they don't have an
adequate placement for that.
Um, and that's why children end
up in offices and other
unsuitable kinds of places for
children.
Um, but in order to function, in
order for the caseworker to
actually do their job, they have
to have their placements, those
placements have to be available
at this time. Um, there's an
absolute lack of foster families
to accomplish that. There have
been times in the past, uh, I
will say this when.
Many, maybe even the majority of
children in custody were in
residential treatment, uh,
services.
Those residential treatment
services, I refer to them as
just huge gulags of children.
And there were a lot of children
in residential services. Many of
those were out of state. Some of
those were in state large places
like Memorial for those of you
that's been around for a long
time. So there are other things
to do with these children.
Um, but if you go back to the to
the primary need of a child to
have a primary caretaker and
guardian, uh, that's impossible
in a residential treatment
centers. So congregate care, I
think the, the US, the US Senate
has investigated that the
numbers of, of uh developmental
investigations of that. It's
just not a suitable, it's, it's
sometimes necessary. There are
times when children have to end
up in residential care.
But it should never just be the
default for not having um foster
foster families.
The third thing is in the, in
the lacks, lack of placements,
lack of uh case workers and
staffing.
Um, the third thing is the lack
of services. Um, when I talked
to some social workers in the
past, over time, um, many of
them.
resign or don't last because
there's nothing to do with those
children, they don't have a
place to put them. And they also
cannot access services. And
that's why, um,
The health, uh, the healthcare
authority was included, which
was HSD at the time was included
in the Kevinness lawsuit was to
make sure that those services
were actually provided that they
were appropriate for children,
that they were timely and that
there was an adequate network.
We know that there's not the uh
the managed care companies have
always
Um, consistently reported
themselves as having adequate
networks, um, but we know that
that's not the case. We know
that when if you're a provider
and you're looking for those,
and we also know that um
If, uh, say like the LFC does
something like this, this secret
shopper.
Um, in this investigation that
they've done a number of times,
which is just an attempt simply
to call and see if they can get
an appointment. And they found
that, you know, a minority of
the time, something less than
20% of the time, but they even
get an appointment. So we know
those networks are not adequate.
And, and my point is that
It's, it's a three-legged stool.
You have to have adequate
staffing and caretakers. You
have to have a place to put
these children, and you also
have to have services without
those three and without all
three of those, um, that it's
impossible to actually run a
child protective service agency.
Um, I think I'm gonna leave it
there and let uh Mike talk about
I, I am with uh a consultant and
a partner.
Um, not a legal partner, but a
uh a partner with the uh
Kevinness plaintiffs and work
with them on these kinds of
issues. And so I think the the
way forward in that has been
laid laid out in the Kevinness
agreement.
Mr. Chairman, senators, do
anyone have any questions at
this point that Doctor Davis
might be able to address
regarding just the framework.
Leave all the questions.
OK, thank you.
Um, I just
Introduce myself, um.
I'm
One of the lawyers of the in
what's been, you know, what you
guys know as Kevin S.
It's important, I think, to to
to go back and and be.
Um
Accurate about the history of
Cavanness because
It really is an unusual, at
least in my experience, a very
unusual.
Um
situation that um you just don't
see in the in the legal system
very often, and I've been
involved in other, in class
action litigation involving
jails and prisons and
And uh people with developmental
disabilities and, and, um,
And these
This committee knows about
those.
What happened in Kevin Ash's was
unique. It was a group of
Very
of child advocates from all
over.
From a psychiatrist to school
teachers from um Donana County
and, and, um.
Harding County to Ria Riba
County and throughout the entire
state getting together and
recognizing.
At certain meetings that would
happen throughout um the year,
you know, things are
Uh, are, are getting worse and
um the challenges that children
in foster care are facing, uh,
are getting greater foster
parents are finding their
mission and their, you know,
their, their role getting
harder.
Um, and, and then we started
developing data. So it was, it
was, it was a group of lawyers,
but it was largely a group of
stakeholders who are nonlawyers
who came together.
And we started collecting that
information. Kevin asked is, is
a, is actually 13.
Children, Evans is the first
one.
And they're all listed, and we
chose 13, actually 9 1st and
then 13 and then so you can kind
of move the numbers around, but.
Each child's experience.
In the lawsuit, we saw, we ought
to illuminate a particular
Very grave need.
So it, it was a group of, of
Um
You know, John Doe's.
All of whom have experienced
something that the, the
community of child advocates.
Identified as very, very, very
harmful and very, very, um,
dangerous for their development.
And we identified them as jobs
and those those situations being
the result of failures by CYFD
and um HSD.
That's actually how it started
was, what's the problem? And,
and what are the, what's what's
focus on the real issues instead
of just screaming and yelling at
the department's not doing this
or should be doing that.
Let's get very specific. And so
if you read the lawsuit, it's
very specific. It's long, it's
100 pages long, I think.
All right.
And we started that, and we
filed it.
Uh, filed that lawsuit in
federal court. Immediately.
We sat down with the state.
Um
And this governor and her
secretary at the time, um,
opened doors and said, we gotta
talk about this.
We don't, we do not want to
spend 15 years in a class action
lawsuit in federal court, with
some judge dictating.
What can and can't happen,
should happen, deadlines. We all
know this stuff.
and as the secretary said
publicly at that time, we are
all on the same page.
We are all on the same page.
About these problems the
department has.
And we're also on the same page
about how to fix them.
Kevin asked settlement, we call
it the FSA, the final settlement
agreement. It took a year to
negotiate that a year of very,
very sophisticated and serious
negotiations led by one of by
truly the nation's best expert
on reforming child welfare.
spent a year with this mediator,
and he wasn't just a media kind
of going back and forth like,
you know, you, you're willing to
do this? How about that? What do
you think about this? This is a
mediator who brought content.
Um, serious content to it.
And so it wasn't a adversarial
bang your heads against the wall
process, it was hard and it took
a long time.
But then we, we came to this
final settlement agreement,
which again, if you have time.
It's worth reading, because it
lays out
An agreement
A partnership.
how we go from where we were in
2018 and 2019 to where we should
be. And out of 4 year.
leash on it.
These are things we got to get
done. And if we do them in 4
years.
We can all
Step away and recognize the
children in Mexico who are are
are are
placed in, in foster care have
Have the resources necessary to
be successful.
Children are such successful
adults to get through this
process. OK, that's the story.
The final settlement agreement
has lots of parts, it's got
different appendices, and it's,
it was really
Carefully constructed, word by
word language was was very
important.
And the secretary of CYFD and
the secretary of of then HSD
were at the table at every one
of those meetings. It, it was,
it was in my experience,
remarkable.
Truly remarkable.
To have, um,
Have that kind of buy in from on
all sides. So that's what we
came up with this FSA, the final
settlement agreement, and it has
in it.
Things that need to be done.
And Gates
By which these things should be
done, and incremental measures
that you have to get here, and
then we're gonna get here, and
then we're gonna go here and
like I said, it was a 4 year
plan.
To roll out, um.
Nobody had, nobody was dreaming
that this was gonna be easy or
that just
This group of, there were times
when they're 40 or 50 people in
these meetings.
Nobody was dreaming that.
Oh, just because we say it.
It shall be, it, it shall
happen.
Nobody thought that we recognize
everyone recognizes a lot of a
lot of work ahead of us.
And so the work started. Um, we
were tripped up.
I say we because I still always
talk about this, even though I
am on the other side of CFT I
filed the lawsuit against COFD.
I am there.
Yeah, on the other side.
I say we because it's never
while we have disagreements and
certainly Kevin has illuminated
many of them.
We were frustrated initially, we
had COVID that caused, you know,
all of us like everything got
turned upside down like a snow
globe, and we were um trying to
deal with that and the
department was trying to figure
out how to, you know, provide
services, and you try to imagine
what it's like when you have a
mandate to do in-home services
to go into somebody's home and
see if there's adequate food
and, and whether the lights are
on, whether there's adequate,
um,
Uh
Resources when you
When you, you can't, none of us
could go into anybody's home. So
there were some challenges we
worked on that. And so Kevin
asked agreement said let's
pause. Let's kick these
deadlines out.
and kicked him way out.
So anyway, that's, that's the
story, and so we go through the
the the the thing that I want to
focus.
and it's something that you
can't really understand that
Kevin has, I can't understand
Kevin S unless I look at the
mechanism for for measuring
progress, and that was, we call
them the co-neutrals.
The state of New Mexico agreed.
That we would have started out
as 3 people, 3 national experts,
and one of them, um,
Um, had to leave the team for
some some uh other
Professional reasons, these two
people.
Um, the co-neutrals.
They genuinely are.
Like the most skilled and
experienced experts in the
nation. They turned around New
Jersey. They turned around
Oklahoma, they turned around
Tennessee. They, they have these
folks know what they're doing.
And they said, OK, we'll do it.
And so
Kevin asked's agreement has
co-neutrals built in.
It's not me saying it, and it's
not the secretary or her team
saying it, what are the
co-neutrals saying? The
co-neutrals, they fly out to New
Mexico several times a year, and
it's not just the two of them,
they have a whole team, they
have a staff, and they go and
interview.
They drive to Silver City and
they talk to people. They drive
to uh Clayton Clayton and talk
to people, and they spent a lot
of time in Albuquerque, Santa Fe
and Crucis as well.
So they issue reports.
Issue
agreement has dates by which
they will
In form what they, what their
findings are.
Have, has the state.
Met the deliverables. Have they
hit those targets?
And if not, why not?
It's really dense and really
informative stuff.
Um, it's a kind of, it's a kind
of information, you just never
really get.
In a regular kind of lawsuit
scenario. You have these people
who are empowered to talk to
anybody in the state they want
to.
They're empowered to look at any
documents they want to.
And they drive into COD offices
and, and sometimes now sometimes
unannounced and talk to workers.
They talk to foster parents,
they talked to all kinds of of
stakeholders. So anyway, that's
I'm saying all this because it,
that's the framework of Kevin S.
It's not a
It's not a situation where you
have some, some folks over here.
Who are suing
To get a, a finite.
You know,
identifiable result.
Today.
It's a lawsuit that is about
recognition of the challenges
that we as New Mexicans have.
Um, and so many areas.
But particularly, um,
With respect to children and
at-risk children.
I hope to weave some of that
with you guys. Yeah, there's
been adversarial, there's a lot
of adversarial, there's a lot
of, you know, stuff that goes
back and forth, but go back, I,
I try and our team tries to go
back every time to.
Why are we doing this? What's,
what's the goal? And the goal
is, is not to
Well, the goal is to improve the
system. And so, so one of the
one of the things that I can
share with you is the
co-neutrals do very, very, very
good work.
Their reports are
Thorough, there's specific,
their footnoted, they have,
they, they will tell you why
they say what they say.
And they've been doing that for
4 years now.
So we get these reports yearly,
we get interim reports and we
also get letters at different
times from them. And the letters
are sent to um CYFD HCA and to
the plaintiffs, and it gives us
a chance to sit down and say,
OK, well, wait a minute.
That's not good.
That wasn't part of the plan,
where what's, what do we do,
how, how do we arrest that
process and go in a different
direction.
And that's
That's, um, the, the, the
history. Now,
In Caveness
Remember, we filed a big federal
lawsuit, a 100 pages or so, I
don't know, may have been longer
than that.
We made a decision.
At the table with CFD and HCA.
He made a decision
To replace this lawsuit over
here, which, well, I know how to
do a lawsuit. We, we, we
replaced it with this agreement
over over here.
So we dismissed the lawsuit.
That's unusual also, because
oftentimes what what people
angry at the government do is
they say, well, we're suing you.
We're not gonna dismiss this
until you do all these things.
And if you don't, we're going
back to the judge and the judge
is gonna put you in contempt or
all this stuff and and the case
gets micromanaged sometimes by a
judge who she's doing the best
she can, but she's not a, she's
she's not a policy person that
has experience in CYFD anyway.
We dismissed the lawsuit, we
said we trust.
This is the best path forward.
This is the way we should go.
This agreement with the state,
with um
Yeah, with the highest level.
People in the state all the way
up to the governor saying,
We're gonna do this.
And this is, we're about 4 years
from now, we're gonna be
someplace different than we are
now.
And I'm, I'm saying that because
Um
The, it was a gamble. So
speaking from perspective as a
lawyer.
Why do you give up?
The hammer of a of, why do you
give up the the hammer of a
judge.
Sitting up there
Ordering, ordering people to do
stuff.
Because
We, we're all on the same page.
We don't, we don't need a, a
judge hammering us. And, and,
and the other reason, and this
is much more important to you.
Children don't have time.
You put a 3 year old in custody.
And you put it in a placement
that's not safe.
Or you don't have a placement
for her, so she doesn't get, she
doesn't get taken into custody
because
We don't have a place to put
her. Um,
You can't sit around and wait
for a federal judge to, to rule
on that.
The child's needs are right now.
And that's another thing I think
motivated both the state and us.
To, to, to move away from the
court process, the litigation
process to an agreement.
Collaborative, let's meet, let's
work on this together.
So
That's the history, there have
been games, there have been
times when there have been
successes, and the plaintiffs
will be proud and pleased to
talk about those. The things
that the state has done to um
And has, it hasn't been easy and
they've they've had the support
of the legislature, and they've
done some important things. And
some of the things
As uh Doctor Davis just shared
with you.
are still
Persistent
problems, agonizing this entire
system.
And
Uh, skilled, um, social worker,
I mean, uh,
Yeah, so, uh, professor actually
in social work, um.
Said this once and I, I, I
overheard it. He wasn't speaking
to me. He said, you know, you
don't need to know anything.
To know that that to run a
child protective system, foster
care system.
You start with two things.
Talk with professionals.
That can assess
And evaluate
And make good decisions about
what happens next for this kid.
people skilled and trained and
knowledgeable.
You need that?
And then as Doctor Davis said,
you need a safe.
good nurturing homes.
You have to have that
He said the next guy walking on
the sidewalk, this professor,
this next guy walking down the
sidewalk knows that.
You're going to develop your own
foster care system, you start
with those two things.
And that's where
We went to, we, we got report
after report report of, of, of
this department not being
successful in in meeting the
Kevins.
Um, requirements on both of
those two things.
Primarily
So we sought arbitration. I said
a minute ago, we don't go back
to a judge because the case got
dismissed. But that Kevin S
agreement says, if you have
disputes and you can't resolve
them, you go to mediation.
And if mediation doesn't resolve
them, then you can do other
things. We, you know, and we've
done all mediations, mediations,
memo memorandum of
understanding, moving deadlines.
The plaintiffs have done that
over and over and over again.
And this last year, um, it was
in the late summer of 2023
actually.
We got information about some,
some, um,
A number of matters,
particularly regarding workforce
not having enough workers.
And not having enough
placements.
That caused us to say
We're not mediating anymore. We
need to get an arbit we're gonna
need to get a decision made.
We don't go back to the judge,
but the FSA says you go to an so
we.
Trigger that process. An
arbitrator is going to have to
look at this and make a decision
whether CYFD has or has not
fulfilled its obligations under
the agreement.
And so we went, so
That that's an arbitrator chosen
by CYFD years ago, you know, at
the beginning that arbitrator is
a lawyer in Albuquerque. He's a
Uh, very well respected
attorney, and he said,
It's
Let's do it.
So in November of 2024, so just
a couple months ago, we've spent
We spent 3 weeks in this
arbitration. We actually only
had 8 full days of testimony. We
had some other days that were
burned up doing other things.
90 different exhibits.
20 some witnesses.
Um
And these exhibits were some of
them had 100, 100, 200 pages, so
90 is is is a sticker on the
front page, but
Um, and you have a summary of uh
what the arbitrator found.
So
I'll, I'll stop talking for a
little bit, um.
In a little bit, but I want to
just
Share with you, I know the
frustration. I've spoken with
many of you, many of your
colleagues on the House side.
What do we do? We gotta do
something. We gotta do
something. Um, arbitrators.
Uh
This
This is unacceptable. This, this
can't continue.
You can't, we can't continue to
have kids.
You know, the most vulnerable
children in New Mexico being
placed at even greater risk as
soon as they're picked up by
CYFT, that can't continue.
Right.
So, what I wanna suggest to you
we know what has to be done.
It's not a new law, in my
opinion, I don't know of a new
law that's gonna make it easier,
make, make it more likely we're
going to get to where we need to
go.
I think the department needs to
be supported. I think they
obviously they need to be um um
you have oversight
responsibilities, but um,
Con-neutrals, letter after
letter after letter have said.
Here's a problem. Here's how you
fix it.
Multiple times.
That's in the record.
Then we have a totally
independent arbitrator.
Listen to
You know, huge volume of
information, testimony in a
trial, and he says the same
thing.
He says these are this is what
this can't continue, and here's
the path forward.
That's him.
That's in his decisions, 34
pages single space, so don't
expect you all to read it as
carefully, but, but there's
certain parts of it, you should,
because
There's not a silver bullet.
There's not a, in my opinion,
and I think speaking for all
the, when, when you talk with
Kevin S, yeah, there are a
handful of lawyers. There are
about 3 dozen other.
Advocates from all areas, child.
Welfare experts, doctors,
psychiatrists, different folks.
So when I say Kevin asked
community, I think
speaks with one voice on this,
which is
We know what to do.
Who neutrals have said it.
Mhm
Uh, the arbitrator has said it.
And her state of the state, the
governor has said it.
And I've had countless
conversations with, we've had a
lot of conversations with the
leadership of CYFD.
They embrace the Keveness.
There's nobody at CYFD who's
saying no, we're not gonna do
that. Ah, forget it, we're not
doing that either.
I, I, I don't, I, I've never
heard that.
Um, there have been failures,
and there have been, they've
been benchmarks not met. They've
been, you know, deliverables not
delivered. That's not, that's
not in dispute, but it's not a,
I don't think it's a problem
where we need a new law, we need
some new.
Cool. We have the tools.
We have frankly, the best expert
in the nation.
Help us get there.
And we're gonna stay as
plaintiffs.
Holding to it and you know,
complaining every time they miss
a mark and complaining every
time things go wrong, and we're
certainly open to, I think, um,
Ideas, what we're not doing that
we should be doing. But I, um,
But I think that if you read the
If, if, if we look to the
experts.
The
They have, they have thought
this through pretty carefully.
And, um, and if they have
And the arbitration, by the way,
was on really just the 4.
core issues. FSA has covers
everything, including Indian
Child Welfare Act issues
includes issues having to do
with kids with developmental
disabilities. It's got, it's,
it's really comprehensive. The 4
issues that we litigated in
November were
Workforce
Um, basically,
Having enough human beings,
having enough bodies to do the
work.
qualified
Well trained professionals.
They're operating, you can get
their numbers.
CYFD operates hovers somewhere
between 50, 60%.
Occupancy or 40% vacancy
throughout the state.
The secretary has more current
numbers on that, I'm sure.
You gotta have people doing it.
Second, we arbitrated that there
aren't enough foster families,
not enough foster homes.
And I'm just going to depart for
a second. I know we've been
going a while, so, um.
When you say foster home.
OK, we need more foster homes. I
might, my wife and I might be
able to provide particular type
of care for a particular, you
know,
For, for children with
particular needs that come into
foster care.
That may be very different. We
may have a very different skill
set than Doctor Davis or any of
you. And so it's not just having
a number.
And we have this many foster
homes, we have to have foster
homes that are trained and are
supported.
With children who by the way,
are in custody because they
faced tremendous adversity. They
have been through some horrible
stuff.
Before they get into foster
care. So they're not, you can't,
I don't have to speak anymore,
you know what I'm talking about.
It's, it's, it's a challenge
being a foster parent for, for a
child who's been abused and
neglected.
Um, throughout his or her
lifetime. So anyway, so those
are the things we arbitrated,
not enough workers, not enough
foster homes. One of the other
things we arbitrated was, you
know, it's a law, it's actually
it's in.
It's in the end, you know, it's
getting children to
professionals immediately, so
that when a child comes into
custody, she gets a
She, she sees a dentist, and she
sees somebody who does a whe
child check.
The reason Doctor Davis can
comment on this further, the
well child check is critical.
The kid, you measure their
developmental milestones, the
same things you do with your
kids, you know, the
developmental milestones. How
are they doing in this? What,
what kind of vocabulary do they
use? Are they, do they have any
neurological issues? Do they
have any physical issues, all
those things that have been
potentially neglected because
the, the kids are living in a
home where
Um, the family is overwhelmed
with everything else, that
child's may have a demonstrable.
We've had children come into
custody, they're deaf.
And it's not until
They get their well child
checked that anybody knows that.
You've had children with major
vision problems, um, with
diagnosable chromosomal um um
like dysmorphology.
They come in and like, it's the
first time a pediatricians wait
wait a second.
That's not right. And then they,
that child gets, gets.
On a path towards the services.
Anyway, those are the kinds of
things we arbitrated, um, and I
think you can read what, what
the arbitrator.
Included. I, I'm sorry I've gone
really long, and I'm sorry that
probably is stuff you guys
already know, but um.
But if you have any questions.
Uh, we'll go to members of the
committee and we probably take
another 30 minutes or so, and
still get our agenda completed
today, so we'll try and go
through some of it quickly. Let
me just see. I've got a number
of hands we'll start around, so,
uh, uh, Senator Doig.
Brantley.
Mysti
Stewart
I miss anyone yet?
Oilly
All right. A number of you, if
we can try and keep yourself to
5 or 10 minutes at the very
outside, please. We'll stay
close to our schedule. I'm
watching on the weather and it
looks like we're still doing
pretty good. So, uh, Senator
Duke for let's say 5 to 7
minutes please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for this
presentation. Uh, I think it's
incredibly helpful, um, and, and
I learned a lot.
What
Since this is a settlement and
then you go to arbitration. What
are
What are the consequences if
these benchmarks aren't met.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, um.
Well,
This arbitration was under the
New Mexico Arbitration Act.
Uh, that's, and
I had to learn all this, so I've
never used this before, but
basically when we, this was
years ago when we entered the
FSA.
In New Mexico Arbitration Act
allows either side.
To, um, appeal.
The decision, we understand the
the state is not going, going,
not going to appeal.
But either side can go to the to
a district court judge and asked
that court to essentially affirm
the finding of the of the
arbitrator.
Um, and
That court has
Lots of powers, um, additional
powers and different kinds of
powers, such as contempt, they
can find, they can, you know, go
back to that sort of notion that
we ran from initially, which is
a judge who
absorbs whatever he or she can
in an afternoon hearing and then
tries to decide what to do about
it. But that is, that is a
A path. That's, that's a
direction that nobody wants to
go in.
But, um
People ask, well, what's the
hammer? What, what's, what's the
hammer that's hanging over CYD's
head. This is, this is pretty
Um
Uh
And this is information that has
to be addressed. It has to be,
we got to do something right
away, and that's the hammer if
uh ultimately you can get a
judge, and then we're back on
that path where, uh, a state
court judge.
I
Basically overseeing the the
FSA.
Thank you and
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Hart, I
I think this is probably a
question really for the
secretary who I'm not gonna put
on the spot cause she didn't
come here today expecting to to
speak to us. Um,
I guess from your perspective,
What I'm hearing is
The code neutrals, everyone
identified. There's a list of of
problems, and here's, here's the
solutions. And you said that
there have been some successes.
What
What's your like, why are their
successes in some areas and then
in other areas if, if we know
what the solutions are, we're
not seeing that same success in
those.
Do you know? I am.
Not qualified to answer that
question because that's the same
question I have, senator.
Well, you know, like, like
everything else in life, it's
harder than it looks. That's
what I would say. And, and I
know that's kind of a stupid
stupid answer. But, uh, but I
really do mean that, that the,
the, uh, the Kevinness
agreement, the full settlement
agreement laid out, not just the
goals, but also the step wide
stepwise process, for example,
in order to even start analyzing
uh the uh the state of New
Mexico's child protective
services, uh, they had to create
what they
Call the data of validation
plan, and that data validation
plan meant that the this was
long before the current
administration meant that the uh
that CYFD had to create this
data infrastructure to create
all this information because a
lot of times, you know, to be
honest, they were flying blind,
and it was that way, it's that
way with every single one of
those, it's like, uh, if you.
Need caseworkers and you don't
have them, it may be a salary
issue, it could be a culture
issue, um, uh, if you have large
numbers of um people resigning
and you don't have and you have
terrible retention, um, that
needs to be addressed and so
it's, there's always a question
behind it, and, and that's what
I think it is, is, is it's not
one thing you can do, it's, it's
a, it's a necessary task with a
number of tasks before that.
Um, and so what I will say this
though, that the, the
co-neutrals have
For the most part, laid out
those kinds of tasks. They
understand the culture of New
Mexico, just like they
understand the culture of Texas,
New Jersey, Oklahoma, and all
the other Tennessee and all the
other places they've worked.
Um, but ultimately, um,
You have to start where you are,
and, and that's, that is the
only answer that I can, um, that
I can say I've worked for the
department and uh and I know it
is hard.
What if I, if I have time left,
Mr. Chair. What, um, so the
co-neutral sub worked in these
other states has
Have those other states as their
path.
Kind of to fixing these issues
does does our path look similar
to what their pants look like,
or, or are we an outline?
I hate to answer for them, um, I
think they would say.
That the progress in New Mexico
has been.
More difficult to achieve that
they are, are frustrated, um.
I don't really wanna put words
in their mouth, but their most
recent reports are echoed in the
arbitrator's decision, which is
10% on this, 15% on that, 20% on
that. I mean, they're, they are,
um,
They're frustrated.
Um
And that's not
That's my observation. Um, I, I
suspect they'd be willing to
talk to you, um.
But Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
want to go back to one other
thing you asked about what other
remedies.
The arbitrator actually has
broader powers than he used in
his decision. In his decision,
he's ordering things to be done.
He also, he has plenary power.
He has more power than a judge
would have in my, in our view.
We go and we built this into the
FSA. The arbitrator can appoint
a receiver and say, look, you
guys are.
We're done.
Done. I'm gonna point a
receiver. I'm gonna point
somebody.
He doesn't work for the
governor, doesn't work.
For me, somebody to come in here
and run this whole system.
Kevin asked,
I shouldn't have spoken for
everybody. I'm sure there's some
opinions out there that are
different, but
We have the roadmap. We got the
plan and it's, it's detailed and
it's, it's, it's comprehensive.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Senator, for being timely to
Senator Brantley.
5 to 7 minutes please. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you
guys for your expertise and
Right
Really
the needs of these vulnerable
children, I think you did an
excellent job, Mike, of
explaining why the settlement, I
didn't understand this, but why
that settlement was reached in
the first place. That's because
at the time, there was a uh
expert crafted plan and in good
faith we we thought we were all
on the same page.
Fast forward to the arbitration.
It, it really, if we're being
honest, didn't tell us anything
we we didn't know.
And that's that CYFD isn't
following the plan.
And it is in the.
The, the greatest concern and to
to Senator Do Higgs point would
be.
Where's the enforcement of that
at what point do you just allow
an agency to completely
disregard the plan and, and I
say this because I'm gonna push
back a little bit with some of
the suggested steps forward that
this legislator, at least in the
last 4 years that I've been
here, has adequately over over
funded in many cases, CYFD. So
the solutions are fund fund.
Um
Which we've had that bill before
here too, but
The agency has been well funded.
By every ask that they make, we
can't find what they don't ask
for in our defense, but they've
been well funded.
Where do we go from here if we
have a settlement plan that
seems to, to lack in enforcement
and, and I'll follow up by
saying this, I love the idea
that you had said something like
we don't need any new laws
because I'm guilty of
Throwing proposed legislation
around hoping that something
sticks because we're desperate
for solutions, right? If what
I'm hearing from you today is
We don't need, we don't need
anything other than CYFD to
follow the plan that they're
already mandated to follow.
Am, am I off here?
Sorry, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Braley, no, I don't think you're
off. I think you're.
You restating the obvious in
some ways. I mean, it seems
you're absolutely right, there's
nothing in the neutrals, I mean,
in the arbitrator's report.
That is, is news to anybody.
Um
They'll neutrals have been
making those findings over and
over and over.
How do we put teeth, Mr. uh
Chairman.
How do we put teeth in it?
Where, where do we go from here
as a legislator and we're saying
we've done all we can do.
I
I'm cautious of and have strong
feelings about that, obviously,
I'm cautious because I look at
it from the perspective of of
litigant who then came to the
table and reached an agreement
that I'm invested in personally.
Um
And if I was sitting
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Brownley, if I were sitting in
your seat, I would be feeling
the exact same sense of
frustration. It comes from, you
know, the sense of what do I,
what, what am I doing wrong?
What do I have to do to make
this.
You know, turn this corner to
get us back on track.
And I wish I had it.
A nice crisp answer for you. I
think, however, that
Um, the
I was
I'm speaking for myself only. I
was pleased to hear the
governor's state of the state
where she talked about foster
children. She talked about
foster parents.
She's, you know, she's not never
been unaware of these things. I
mean, it's not like she's
ignored him. She's certainly
participated with us. It's just
It's
The
Continuing to encourage the good
work and encourage the agency
and and encourage the people
that are doing the job.
I'm, um, and, and.
uh
With respect to funding, I'm not
an expert in that, but I've seen
the numbers, um, just in the
arbitration, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Brownley, um,
LC testified.
At the arbitration, in this
arbitration, FOC testified about
the money.
And so I heard about that and
heard about whether money was
imped and you know what he
found.
Um
What, what did he find?
It's not, that's not the issue.
It's not. It's not the money,
you know, Mr. Chairman, um,
it's.
There's there's certain issues I
know from the department you'll
have to hear from the secretary
that when you appropriate money,
when you appropriate.
$20 and you tag it to a
particular
Need, so $20 for this to buy
this thing.
And it becomes impossible to do
it quite like that.
And the money isn't spent, it
reverts back.
Um
You know, I think as
administrators, they have to
have some flexibility at times
with um and yeah if you over if
you're budgeting and budgeting
and budgeting every year and
you're giving them a bunch of
money, you're gonna want to have
A tagline, this money is going
for this need. And so I
understand that tension.
But um
That's a long answer to a short
question, and I'm sorry about
that,
I appreciate it, but
legislators, as they well funded
CYFD and I expect that they're
asked this year will be funded
in full as well. There's a 3rd 1
on there, the other relief
suggestion was the creation of
an ombudsman.
That's been proposed in the past
to my knowledge it hasn't even
been introduced this this
session.
It's to fund the fund in two
different the data submissions,
fund the caseload and to create
an office of an ombudsman
outside overside independent
counsel of CYFD.
At this time, that legislation
has not even been introduced
this session. Thank you guys so
much for for your time.
Thank you, Senator Maestas and
then Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Doctor, Mr. Hart, thank
you. I just wanna commend you. I
can't imagine the work that went
into that 100 page petition.
And remedies, a creative
remedies that you've come up
with, obviously the
Heaviness, plaintiffs deserve.
Uh, to receive damages for what
they went through, but I just
want to commend you to, to, to
do a case as a lawyer that
exceeds.
Your immediate client
And has a profound effect on
others is, is the pinnacle of.
What every lawyer should aspire
to do, so I just want to thank
your associates and yourself,
Mr. Hart, appreciate you.
Question, um,
So
We can appropriate.
You know, 5 workers here or 5
workers there, but we can't, uh,
Put in the, we can't really
appropriate foster.
Did the, did the experts say how
do we
Um, how do we inspire and
recruit more families in Mexico
to, to take on that task of
caring for foster kids.
One of the things that uh Mr.
Chairman and uh uh Senator
Maestas, one of the things that
was uh.
Uh, a matter for arbitration was
the uh
The department's failure to
follow the uh the the
instructions, not just to find
foster parents, but to locate
but to single out and identify
staff who were uniquely and and
entirely devoted to recruiting
foster parents and then
supporting those foster parents.
And so the only answer to that
is that um you're right, you
can't, you couldn't pass the
legislation that says they have
to have a certain number of
foster parents, but they can be
encouraged as to what kind of
plan would get them there
eventually, uh, and that was the
matter of arbitration because
that the arbitrator found that
that
Did not happen. Um, and so it's
the same way and it's, it's the
same way with Senator Brantley,
it's like how do
Um
How do you make anybody do
anything?
When it really comes down to it.
I know this sounds like you got
a psychiatrist here on the
stand, but it's a mystery to me,
um, you know, because I have
adolescents and they don't do
their homework, they're not
adolescents anymore.
But yeah, and so when that kind
of question comes down, you give
them a plan, you give them a
stepwise plan, and you enforce
those plans along the way, that
could be one of the things that
uh the ombudsman would do is, is
not just giving the goal, but
actually saying now do this now
do this now do this, now do
this. Um, I think the governor
made a substantial um uh.
Um, improvement in um increasing
the stipend for foster parents.
I think that is long overdue and
I think it'll have good effects.
Um, and that wasn't even in the
arbitration order, but all I can
say is it's a stepwise process,
and
You really can't enforce the
endpoint. You can only enforce
the next step.
Thank you, and, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Doctor, Mr. Hartley,
uh, so this didn't, this didn't
morph into like a
consent decree like the
Department of Corrections back
in the 80s.
I'm really glad that that didn't
happen cause that.
I'm a I'm a lawyer in the uh
representing Amiki in the DOJ
APD litigation and
The consented creatures don't
move those institutions the way,
you know.
And agreed upon
settlement might with with.
With the plaintiffs at the
table, so.
But anyway, in terms of
statutory fixes or or or
structural changes to the
department, um, was that ever
discussed and or do you, and do
you have any recommendations for
us, like, for example, Miss
Chairman, the.
I'm doing a bill. I'm coming
over from the house side that
changes the words in the
juvenile system from
adjudicated.
Delinquent to youth.
And just, you know, so that
youth could receive those
services, not just adjudicated
delinquents. Is there any fixes
like that that that you can tell
us if not now, maybe.
In the next week or so, any
structural changes or statutory
changes come out of these
negotiations.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Masas, I
think, uh,
Be happy to go back to.
Our teams and and ask that
question.
Mm
But as I spoke earlier, I don't,
I don't think it's.
It's that kind of problem. I
mean, I think it's
It's the problem you can see
from 30,000 ft.
We don't have enough
People working at CFD who have
the skills to do this incredibly
hard job.
We don't have enough homes.
To, to put these damaged, these
children who have suffered
great, great, great harm into
Um, so that they can
Be successful, you know, it's,
it's kind of
There may be
There may be a lot of things
about the Children's code. I, I
could probably talk at length
about the children's code and
things that might be changed.
For the benefit of
One or more group of of folks
who um who are affected by the
Child's COVID.
That's not what that, at least
in our view, that's not what's
what's going on now. The
problems now are really basic.
fundamental.
Not enough homes, not enough
workers.
And um
And
This, uh, and, and the
assessment.
Of children coming into care
being assessed quickly.
Um
Those are, those are the things
you can see from across the
street, he's like, well,
system's not gonna work unless
we.
We fortify those.
thing, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
The, um, and lastly, the um.
I think it's and then morale, I
think the morale of the
department is key, uh, you know,
we're pumping out a lot of
social workers. We need a
marshall plan social workers in
the state. I'll talk to social
worker students and I'm like,
hey, so you're gonna go to CYFD
and they're like, oh, no, like
get get uh.
We need them to be motivated to
go to CYFD to want to solve
these problems, I think with
with the buildout of universal
early childhood education, I
think we can heal our
communities so that there's less
need.
But in the meantime, we need to
meet the current need and and ah
just appreciate the.
The governor and the secretary's
hard work in trying to
Trying to ensure that there's no
more Kevinness situation. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One, can I just add one comment
to that as well, like how do you
get there? And uh.
Uh, someone texted me and
emailed me and I read an article
on something that Utah did, so I
don't think, I think new ideas
is really called for.
That's what I think, I think you
know, if you do the same thing
over and over again and it's not
working, it's time for something
new and and Utah, for example,
um, legislatively created a
nonprofit to all do all the
recruiting and the support for
foster parents. Now,
I hadn't thought of that. And,
and I think that's a brilliant
idea. It took it, it took away
our responsibility from uh
protective services, which, you
know, they do need relief. Um,
they, it's something that
they're having trouble even
finding the the people to do.
And so I think the new ideas
are um are are not just throwing
spaghetti at the wall. I think
some of these ideas we could
look and see what no ideas.
That's to me, is a.
new idea.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well,
Before this last comment and
thank you both very much for
being here. Uh, in answer to
Senor Maestas.
You know, I, I, I don't find any
solutions and is or in your,
your testimony, um, because if
it really is and and I, I, I
think it is that we don't have
enough professionals and we
don't have enough placements.
And we have really fallen down
on getting foster family
placements, um,
So, you know, before this
comment, I was gonna say, well,
you know, I'm kind of depressed
up here today. I don't hear any
solutions. So any solutions, so,
all right, so Utah, set up a
nonprofit to find families, to
find foster families to find
placements, how did that work?
Did it work? How long have they
been doing it? I mean, let's,
let's find some solutions other
than continuing to ask.
The CYFD who can't find any
solutions either.
I just think we're at a loss.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Stewart, I, I agree, and I
think, you know.
Um
I think it, the, the, the
responsibility falls on all of
us, not just the department,
including us, too, to come up
with ideas like the idea that we
don't have.
Uh, a suggestion is, you know,
Makes me crazy, frankly, as
crazy as it makes you, but I, so
maybe um
The, the, the idea that there
are new ideas out there and a
thoroughgoing kind of review of
how to get those things
accomplished. I think it's
really called for. It's, it's
late in the game.
I mean, I, I think what we've
done is repeatedly
Um, you know, um.
Medi and form a corrective
action plan that arbitrate, and,
and here we are without a direct
solution and I agree with you.
What um
There
There are discussions about
different. One of the things
that came up with the
arbitration, uh, something that
was new to me, the contractor
CFD hired a contractor to um
To work on, on foster parent
recruitment, and one of his
ideas as I learned was.
If you, if, if, if I'm a foster
parent and I recruit somebody.
To also be a foster parent.
To, you know, to go through the
process. Perhaps there should be
a a reward, a stipend, some kind
of
Some kind of incentive.
And the secretary can explain it
better, but we weren't, at least
the testimony was that you can't
really do that. You have to, you
have to have a contract. You
can't, I mean, you can't just
give money to people, um,
because who decides whether they
fulfilled the obligation, I was
like,
The department actually
apparently looked into that and
got a legal opinion that.
Can't just can't do that. I
don't know anything about that.
I don't know, but there are
ideas and there are, there are
those um
I in the Marshall Plan, I just
wanna like leave this.
That was another, that's an idea
that has
Get out there as well. And it
was, it was at the beginning of
this Kevin.
And the idea, I don't know that.
I, I can't tell you that this
has any merit at all, but the
idea had a lot of.
Promise in our, in our minds,
which was the state itself, the
state.
Recruit starts to talk about the
need that all of us as a
community become foster parents
and and support this system.
The governor
On down, doing public service
addresses saying, we need you,
we need you to help. We need you
to be involved.
And have those on the radio and
on television. I mean, somebody
actually reached out. I was told
to like Brian Urlacher and other
people who New Mexicans identify
as, oh yeah, he's a, he's a.
He's a real New Mexican and and
or she did this for New Mexico
and and having people do those
public service announcement
said.
We're all in this together, and
there's a way to, for us all to
participate. You can't just open
the newspaper and say, oh.
Another child died in foster
care. Ah, and then throw it
aside. Miss chairman, Senator
Stewart.
We can do better and we can't,
it's not just these folks who
need to fix the system, I think
we all have a role.
Well, Mr. Chairman.
I mean, we all want to help. I
mean, that's who we are. We
think we have.
We have uh ideas we have plans,
we want to help.
You know, we're all public
servants, we really are, uh, so,
I mean, I like the idea of a
nonprofit. I like the idea of,
of the PSAs.
I've been asking the public
education department for PSAs
for blue in the face for 6
years, and they say, oh yeah,
we're gonna do that.
And then they never do.
Uh, so.
I, I, I, I just want other ideas
for us to think about because.
I feel like we just can't help.
We cannot help.
You know, we, we've done, I
think we did a social worker
bill, Bill, where we um allowed
them to be part of a loan
repayment program. Am I making
that up? Haven't we worked on
that
Mr. Chairman, could I, uh,
asksen or do to uh tell me what
we did for social workers.
And Mr. Chair Senator, I don't
know what we've done in the
past, but I will note that SB
54.
Has more of that in there, uh,
doing.
Uh, financial incentives for
social workers, um, and tuition
reimbursement.
And first, uh, you know.
Loan forgiveness for service. I
mean, we now have
Basically, free childcare, and
we have free college.
I mean, why aren't we producing
more professionals that want to
do this work. Uh, so I'm just
totally frustrated with this,
and, and we have given CYD
chunks of money that have.
On unused. What do we pay foster
families? What do we pay foster
families for kids. We don't pay
foster families.
I see people in the audience
shaking their head that we don't
pay fo foster there are experts
in the room that can give you
details about that, but
essentially it's a
reimbursement.
Concept or
Mr. Chairman Senator Stewart,
it's where you reimbursed for
the anticipated expenses that
you incur as a foster parent.
For this child, so you're not an
employee of the state, you're
not a, you're not paid, you're
reimbursed. The concept is being
reimbursed.
For the, for the to fulfill the
needs of this kid that's in your
or these children home.
Well, I, I know they're not
employees and they get
reimbursed. What is the
reimbursement look like?
I know there are people in the
room that know those numbers at
the top of their heads. I don't.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. uh,
Senator, those are questions I'm
writing down and I can get those
to you.
Answers to you, Thomas chair.
All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
good. Thank you, Stewart and and
this is a good opportunity
because I know there are people
in the room with that expertise
and who will have answers to
that. I, I want to note for the,
uh, committee and everyone here.
Um, I, I made this the very
first substantive hearing of of
our session for a number of
reasons for I didn't want to do
it on, on our first meeting,
because I thought that might be
too heavy a lift the very first
day I, I'm coming back to you,
said, don't worry. um, but, um,
but I wanted to do it early
enough for the session so that
we would have a time to maybe
use our 60 days here or whatever
it may be remaining to really
find solutions and so I'll
reiterate the secretary is here,
which I commend her very much
and appreciate very much for her
doing here. I'm sure she has the
answers to your questions.
see her taking very careful
notes, and we'll look for the
first opportunity when she's
ready and the governor's ready
to have her come and, and answer
those questions and uh address
some of the things that we, we
did here today. I didn't allow
time for both of those, as I
explained at the onset today,
principally because again, we
reached out to the governor's
staff, and we're told they're
still working on legislation
that did not make sense to kind
of put them on the spot, bring
them in, put them in front of
the committee and say, why don't
you have legislation? Uh, we're
here and, and I thought in
fairness to them we
give them some more time. Uh, I,
I know the government had the
governor had a number of points
she made during her State of the
State, and I thought it would be
best to allow them to flesh
those things out, but when
they're when they're ready to
come with legislation, we'll
have the same presentation with
with them as well too, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just
gonna ask uh just make some
statements, um, and I ask a
couple questions uh from just a
layperson's point of view, um,
So I'm just going under the sort
of the premise or operating sort
of under the.
The, um, yeah, the, the state uh
the premise that, you know,
children are property of their
birth parents and that the
policy or the intent is to keep
families together as much as
possible, and, and if you, if
that's wrong, you know, let me
know, cause you mentioned, uh,
you mentioned, uh, children at
risk, right? And it's like we've
got a child that uh is at risk
of, of being harmed.
And it's like, we've got to make
a decision now.
Um
And so I, my question is, are
our CYFD workers empowered and
supported to make those kinds of
decisions.
Because if they're not,
You know, so, I mean, they're in
a catch-22 sort of situation.
Um, if there's, so you've got,
as you said, you've got an
emergency situation.
Um, are they gonna be in trouble
if they make a decision? I mean,
we already talked about there's
not a lot of places to place
people to place children.
But I would see that if I were a
CYFD worker, I'd be really
worried about that, that I could
really get in trouble for, for
making that kind of decision,
and yet I I'm risking the
child's life.
And so, you know, I just wanted
to know what you, what your
thoughts on or about that.
I think we both have some
perspective. I don't think
you're.
Off base, um.
The challenges that a worker
investigation worker.
Faces
When she or he is at
You know gets this call from
Sky.
has to go out and figure out
what's going on is Doctor Davis
pointed out, it's very
challenging job, and that goes
back to what we're talking about
for these people have to be very
skilled, very, very skilled.
They have to have a lot of
training. The folks who are
doing the investigation have to
have, have to know what they're,
what they're looking for. But
anyway, my, I, to address your
question specifically.
System
Authorizes a worker.
Um, who believes the child is in
imminent risk.
Physical or mental um abuse or
neglect to contact law
enforcement.
Have that child placed in CYFD
custody immediately.
Doctor Davis pointed out.
They have 48 hours. CFT is 48
hours, now it's 72 weekends and
stuff like that. They have a
short period of time to decide
whether they will or will not
seek
uh to, to get legal custody. So
they actually have to go sit.
The workers sit with the CYFD
lawyers.
And sit down and say, do we have
enough? Do we have what we need
to meet the legal standard.
For this child being taken into
state custody. The lawyer makes
the decision with the workers.
That is then filed and a judge
almost immediately.
With very few exceptions, will
place that child in the state's
custody with the understanding
that within 10 days.
The state is going to have to
come forward in front of a
judge.
Explain
Why they took custody of that
child.
So there there's a that that
that's a backstop.
That, um, they, if 10 days after
they picked up the child, this
child's still in in state's
custody, they have to explain
why.
And at that hearing, the judge
has the power to to order
psychological evaluations for
the parents, psychological
evaluation for the children, uh,
uh, behavioral assessment for
the, etc. etc. that judge.
Has the power and has a duty to
order all that right then, so I
don't know if that answers your
question. The, the, they, they
make the best decision they can
and then they have the backstop
of the judicial system to
challenge it. Well, Mr.
President, it just sort of like,
you know, the reinforces the,
you know, the, it's it's a very
difficult job.
It's a very dangerous job.
And it's no surprise that, you
know, people aren't lining up to
do it.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Senator.
I've heard, uh, several
references, I think we've gone
through everybody, anyone else?
Uh, Senator Lorton, it's about
time you get in, jump in the
game, man, tag it.
Thank you. You got up to 5
minutes, sir, I'll be brief. So,
this is outside my, I'm a, I'm
an aerospace engineer, so I sort
of come with the idea like
solutions.
And, and from what I hear that
you all are struggling with the
same thing here. But uh based on
the arbitration, it said that
there were 4 unmet targets. It
was either it was caseworker
hiring and retention.
family recruitment and
retention.
Um
Well child checks within 30 days
and then data basically cleaning
up and validating all the data
that you're getting.
So my question as a um
Layperson not understanding and
and knowing that CYFD does much
more than just those 4 things,
but has there been any
restructuring?
Around these 4 things to address
them directly. In other words,
has CYFD changed their their
process and identified the
individual or organization to do
caseworker hiring to do family
recruiting to do well checks
within the 30 days, and then all
that information.
feeding into a a database.
An IT person responsible to
gather that information. So has
that been done at least to show
that you are doing your best to
accommodate the needs and the
requirements that you have been
unmet as today.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Thornton, um.
It's, it's a difficult question
to answer, like I, I know I
start every uh every response
with that, but the uh I
My, uh
My understanding was that
Um, there has been
restructuring, but not around
these particular topics, and I
want, and I want to point out
that
These topics for arbitration
were chosen because they were
included in an earlier
corrective action plan that was
not followed. And that's, so
that's this represents a
sampling of the deliverables
that are required by the full
settlement agreement. I just
want to make that clear too.
However, as you point out, there
are very clear, these are core
issues, foster parents and
staffing, uh, and, and well
child checks as delivered by HCA
and
And I think it meant each one is
a different answer. I, um,
The, the recommendation, no,
there's not been, as far as I
know, there has not been
restructuring on that and, and,
uh, of course, HCA in order to
get those well child checks, has
ideas, uh, one of those ideas
was to um
Engage and contract with
Presbyterian Health Services
instead of all three MCOs in
order to specifically develop
some expertise with children in
custody, um, you could call that
a restructuring in order to get
this. However, it has not made
an impact on those well child
checks.
But the department might have a
different answer for that.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, I.
Again, as a, as an engineer, I
sort of look at process and say
we need to have these things
identified and then let's work
the issues. Uh, my second
question, Mr. Chair, is you
asked about uh whether or not,
how do we make somebody do
someone do something that they
don't want to do, just either to
care or the stick. You
incentivize or you penalize. And
so the question is, is there
anything in this process that
could incentivize more
caseworkers. Is there anything
that we could do to incentivize
like PSAs as we'd heard earlier
to
Incentivize uh families who may
want, who may want to take this
uh chore on to basically take on
a a a new family member, or are
there penalizing or can we
penalize folks who are, you
know, not getting the data to us
and those kinds. I'm just trying
to figure out ways to
incentivize or penalize folks so
that these processes can be uh
improved upon, Mr. Chairman, and
uh Senator Thornton, it's, I
think that's a good point, is
like rewards and consequences
are the meat and potato.
to s of certain kinds of uh.
Uh, activities. They don't work
that well with a certain groups,
but in this case they would and
however, um,
I honestly think uh.
I would take caseworkers, um, of
all types, both investigators
and permanency workers and
placement workers, I would pay
them a lot more than than
they're getting, and I think
that's one of those areas where
salary makes a difference. I
know they've raised those, I
don't think they've raised them
enough. I pulled up some of the
job postings just to see, uh,
and I don't think uh they're
adequate, frankly.
Uh, this is hard work. However,
the problem is uh like uh
Senator Stewart said.
Um
The people that they're hiring
don't necessarily have degreed
experience uh as independent uh
social workers. They're hiring
as maybe a bachelor's from
almost anything including
criminal justice, and so it's
it's hard to uh
Um
It's, it's hard to raise that
salary past a certain point
since the uh since the
credentials. Nevertheless, I
think they
Uh, I think that is one area,
and I, I think the raising of
the stipend, um, which is
frankly a lot more than a
reimbursement, meaning that is a
very hard job. I think doubling
that, which is what the state
governor kind of did does help.
Punishment, I don't know.
This is punishing, I guess.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have. Thank you.
Senator pole, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I've just got a couple
brief questions being one of
the, the new kids on the block,
if you will, but uh, Doctor
Davis and, uh, Mr. Hart,
appreciate you being here and
sharing with us today. So, uh,
Doctor Davis, I heard kind of
the, the 3 top 3 items that you
know we're liking case workers,
like lacking placement options
and lacking services.
One of my questions
Maybe Doctor Davis would be more
directed towards you is
Kind of share in the the
frustration that, you know,
Senator Brantley and Senator
Stewart had expressed that we're
trying to do all these different
things, but it doesn't seem like
there's the ball's not moving.
That being said, we're talking
about these kids that are the
most vulnerable in the state.
What type of psychological
effects.
Are they gonna experience near
term, long term.
By being in the situations that
they're in currently, the, you
know, the things that they're
having to experience.
Um
Mr. Chairman, Senator Paul, the
um
That, that actually is my area
of expertise. It's not a
administering a child protective
service, but the long term
effects and the short-term
effects, but we'll concentrate
on the long are devastating.
It's the the one developmental
requirement that a young child
has is a consistent uh um
consistent, uh, uh, um,
available.
Responsive, reciprocal kind of
relationship with a child for
that caretaker to, to help that
child develop. It's the only way
that children develop. Um, turns
out, you know, I think there was
a time we thought we could raise
them in test tubes in the 60s,
but it turns out that doesn't
work. That is the only thing in
the long term consequences are
what we call, you know,
dysregulation, but that
dysregulation is broad. It means
they don't have good problem
solving skills. It means that
they don't have good task.
Resistance. It means they have
trouble paying attention. It
means they can't modulate their
moods. It means they don't have
good interpersonal skills, and
so it is child abuse neglect is.
Without a doubt, the mother of
all risk factors for child
development. Uh, there is
nothing worse and, and that's
why I started talking about the
needs of the child for a
consistent caretaker. It's
beyond poverty, beyond services,
beyond anything else that you
can offer a child. The the one
requirement that cannot be
changed is the presence of a
primary caretaker.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I do
just have one other question,
um.
With the lack of.
Placement options.
I know that I've heard and I
don't know how true it is. I
know that there's some truth to
it, but where are these kids
staying? I've heard that they're
staying in in offices. How many
kids, you know, we're talking,
we've gone through this process
over the last several years,
but, you know, last night, last
weekend, how many kids are still
sleeping in CYFD offices. Do we
know that?
You guys have any indication or
to to put you on the spot, but
just trying to get a feel for
where we're at is that that
probably is a good question for
the Secretary. Secretary, just
go ahead on that question,
please, please.
Um
I
Um
We have about 2000.
Thank you, Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. No further
questions.
Um,
I've, I've heard several remarks
today about we need a Marshall
Plan.
Uh, with the Marshall Plan had
was Marshall.
George Marshall, uh, the
Marshall Plan had a general
Who Churchill called the
organizer a victory, you had a
leader.
Who was accountable and strong
and determined.
Uh, that's what the Marshall
Plan was about.
Uh, was, was leadership.
We, um
One of the things that I, I,
I'll lead into my comments
carefully. I, I had a, I had a
An individual whose job was to
go around the country and watch
legislatures and, and, and
compare them and they asked him
one time very candidly, how does
our legislature compare to other
states?
And she said she's amazed by
here how hard we work to not
hurt anybody's feelings.
How in comparison to other
states, they're more prone to
call it the way it is.
And be direct.
And here, seemingly, everybody
pulls their punches.
Um, and, and, and, um, perhaps
less direct and candid as we
might be.
Um
You probably gather where I'm
going with some of this.
Um, I, um, I wanted to do this
early, as I said, because I want
to make sure the secretary has
the time to absorb all these
things, hear these questions,
and come back with answers to
the questions, and also the
governor's agenda. I appreciate
the governor including that in
her state of the state this
year. I'll just tell all of you,
I, I, I, with a great deal, with
a great burden, have felt some
responsibility and
accountability, all this, for
all this because for the last
several years.
There have been bills to impose
effectively a receivership by an
ombudsman.
Um, and Senator Jerry Ortiz Pino
had a complete, uh, essentially
takeover of CYF and D. There's
been legislation to take over
the agency by the legislature
and by an ombudsman and by have
oversight and accountability,
and I've unilaterally
I'll take responsibility for it,
not herd those bills in this
committee.
Because it did not make sense
for me to take an already
burdened agency that could not
meet its responsibilities and
create another agency on top of
the agency that's not getting
the job done and have another
agency telling them they're not
getting the job done.
That made no sense to me.
Um, and it still really makes no
sense to me at all.
But I, I, I've worked with your
predecessor, uh, and cabinet
secretary, and there are many
times your predecessor in the
cabinet secretary position would
call me and say, Joe, please
don't have interim committee
hearings on this, please,
because it it creates a problem
with morale, and I understand
that.
And it creates a problem for us
to recruit and keep people and
so forth and and I um perhaps.
Using my best judgment at the
time, did not advance the bills
to have a receivership or an
ombudsman or to have uh hearings
that were overly critical of the
agency, because I thought
ultimately that was
counterproductive.
Uh, and not constructive, and I,
I please understand, I, I beat
myself up about that judgment,
uh, from time to time, but, but
here we are, and I, I have to
accept responsibility for that.
Uh
I wanted to give this secretary
and and her predecessor and this
administration and the
administration without the
opportunity to, to make
improvement. I have to tell you
that I've read the code neutrals
report. I did it before the
session. I asked my members in
the public at large to read at
least the executive summary.
It's only a couple of pages of
the code neutrals report. This
is Mr. Hart said are experts in
the field. They've compared our
state to other states. Their job
is to do this, they're called
co-neutrals for a reason.
To do, to do it fairly to both
sides. The, the code neutrals
report is damning.
Um, and, and it's damning to me
because um it is showing that
we're not only standing in place
or not making progress, but
we're actually in many critical
areas where we're receding.
Right, we're worse off today
than we were a year ago and
worse off than 2 years ago.
And, and for those of us that
are elected to office, um,
that's damning to me. It, it, to
me, I look at myself in the
mirror as a failure when I see
that in this field and or any
other area.
And I, and I feel like I have to
take some responsibility for
that. I want to do it
constructively, but I want to
reemphasize something Mr. Hart
said,
this is not about an absence of
laws.
And you all have been hearing
that from me for 3 or 4 years,
and you're going to continue to
hear that from me, the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court
spoke the other day, and in his
entire speech about uh crime,
not one mention of the fact that
we need any more laws, not one
mention.
Uh, we come here to Santa Fe
passing bills and introducing
bills because we think that's
our job. But I really appreciate
this committee here today
because we're, we're not gonna
fall for that here, we're not
gonna, uh, just think that the
solution is creating
receiverships and ombudsmans or
funding, uh, projects and money
that doesn't get spent, uh,
we're gonna, I think we're gonna
try and be frank with one
another here in this committee
and in this legislature to say
that um we're not gonna spend
our way out of this?
And we're not gonna to legislate
our way out of this.
We're gonna have to get our
secretary to become George
Marshall.
Uh, or find, uh, somebody above
her or alongside her or with her
to be that kind of a leader.
Uh, who will, who will, who will
do those hard things and, and
show that kind of leadership.
And that's gonna be true on
crime.
And it's gonna be true in this
very difficult area of uh.
Children
I got uh I got emotional in this
espanola, those of you that were
there because everybody up here
has lobbyists, they're well
paid.
Uh, they have us, these kids who
are, even if it's only 2,
slipping under desks, um, we're
their lobbyists.
We're, we're as good as they're
gonna get, um, and you gentlemen
and the secretary and many of
you who are here today we're
we're all they've got for these
for these kids and it's
heartbreaking.
For me to think that. I, I
watched the videotape of
Of um law enforcement going into
a home in Silver City. You all
probably know the case very
well, probably know it in great
detail.
Um, law enforcement going into a
child who was dead there.
Um
Parents strung out marijuana,
drugs, all kinds and evidently
even unaware of their daughter
was dead.
I may not have all my facts
right on that, and I hope you'll
correct man, but I watched the
video and it's just it it it.
So I think Senator Doig, you,
you did, you did a good inquiry,
which is how do we compare with
other states, that's a good,
that's a good inquiry. We don't
have to reinvent the wheel here,
we should figure it out. We've,
um, we've, there has been some
good ideas expressed here today,
public relations and effort by
the governor. The governor has
the bully pulpit.
Um, George Marshall had the
bully pulpit, um, in the past,
we had um
Uh, a former governor, uh, put
photographs of children up for
adoption in the gallery of the
governor's art gallery upstairs.
Um, and their stories to try and
bring attention to adoption.
And and foster placement, and
those are all good ideas. That
was a good idea, then it's
probably a good idea now. Some
of the ideas that we're offered
here today, I think the
governor's talking about tax
incentives and compensation.
These are all good ideas. I
don't, I don't know they, they
need uh new laws, but if they
do, we're here to partner with
everyone here in the room to to
do that early in this session
and taking all of the 60 days do
it when when we had a special
session called this summer, I
said we don't need a special
session on crime as much as we
need a special session on CYFD.
And, and I, and I believe that
and then and I believe that now
only because there's a very, it
seems to be a very uh concrete.
Uh, problem with CYFD as opposed
to crime in general, uh, and,
and I think that there's things
that we could, we can and should
be doing. So I, I appreciate the
committee, um, hearing me out,
my comments and suggestions, and
I hope you all appreciate um
being part of this process.
I, I will land on something
that, again, when I talk about
Marshall or leadership or or
lack or absence or, or need for,
let me just tell you that I
watched a TV report yesterday
that, again, is almost as
troubling as the rest of this,
where I see the two of the
police officers.
Who were part of the corruption
in Albuquerque, APD taking
bribes to fix DWI tickets, um,
we were resigned and were
rehired by.
TYD
There's, there's a lot of room
for improvement, and it's, and
it's inconceivable to me that
that as hard as things may be at
CYF and D to recruit that that
law enforcement officers can be
part of corruption, and the
consequence is not being fired
or their boss is not being fired
or the people up the chain not
being fired and some other
people were part of that, were
part of an internal
investigations. They're the
people responsible for policing
the police are the ones who
evidently were implicated and
then we're allowed to resign,
not be fired, and then to be
rehired.
And they rehired at CYFD.
I hope we'll think about that.
Uh, and, and not be puzzled.
By, by the problems that
confront us.
Sometimes the answers are
Pretty clear right in front of
us, Ms. Casados, I'm looking for
your general.
Boots
And stripes and look forward to
you coming to the committee uh
soon with um your best
suggestions and advice for us
too, so anyone else on the
committee with questions, last
remarks.
Thank you. I had allowed an hour
for this. We've gone to.
But I hope the committee members
will appreciate the need and the
importance of doing so and and I
hope again, as I explained in
our opening meeting, I'm of the
firm belief that that some, some
of what we need to do up here is
pass new laws. A lot of what we
need to do up here is talk and
discuss and explore and
investigate uh amongst
ourselves. So, thank you, Mr.
Hart, doctor, um, and secretary
for being here today and all
members of the committee. Thank
you for the hearing.
We, as I announced at the
beginning of the meeting today,
the sponsors requested that
Senate Bill 25 and 95 not be
heard today. We'll begin with
Senator Brandt on Senate Bill
18. We're gonna, I'm gonna work
hard to get you out of here by 5
o'clock, so expect me to uh
allocate time um with that goal
in mind, please.
I know there's been some
question and some discussion
about the chairs and their
prerogatives and cutting members
off for limiting time and so
forth, please understand that
the last hearing is an example
of that where I might have
planned and thought one hour was
going to be adequate. It clearly
required, I think all of the 2
hours that requires me to make
adjustments in, and that's what
the chair does. So thank you,
Senator Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was
actually really good hearing,
appreciate it, appreciate being
here.
For the most part, um, you know,
my wife and I were foster
parents at one point, and if you
ever want to talk about the
nightmares of being a foster
parent.
I would be glad to talk about
that.
Um.
I'm gonna take off my glasses
cause I cannot read with them
on, uh, but you guys have seen
this spill, we've passed this
bill last 30 day session and
went to the house and died in
the house.
Um, it, it's been cleaned up a
little bit. I actually like the
drafters' work of this one, it
didn't change anything
substantly, but it.
Kind of cleaned up some things
and made it flow a little
better.
Um, this very simply ads,
swatting.
As a felony.
And takes the shooting threat.
We don't have any law against
SWATting today if you need to
know what swatting is, I can
explain that, um, and takes a
shooting threat.
And makes it a felony.
We did pass that, was it 4 or 5
years ago, Philip, as a uh
misdemeanor in the omnibus bill
on crime, I think it's 4 or 5
years ago as a misdemeanor.
Before that, it wasn't illegal
at all. Um, I've never
understood why we wanted
something that uh as a
misdemeanor when you call school
and tell them you're gonna come
and shoot everyone in the
school. Why we would call that a
misdemeanor, um, when a bomb
threat is a felony, so this puts
like
Very good.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, and so,
Senator,
My
It makes sense to me to have,
um,
If someone calls in a bomb
threat, have that be a 4th
degree felony. If someone does
swatting, for that to be a 4th
degree felony, that is.
That is something that
In the, in the heat of the, if I
am in a a fight with Southerner
Maestas and my temper is hot.
I don't think that's something
that I'm just gonna blurt out,
you, you have to take
affirmative steps to to make
those those threats, um, in, in
the way that I think this is
intended to, to address.
I worry more about the shooting
threats because the example you
used was calling up a a school
and and say and making those
threats. But I think.
My fiery temper.
And send my ass, this is really
making me mad. I'm like, oh my
God, I'm gonna murder you. I'm
gonna shoot you. Um, and, and I
say that in a way that is, does
not actually, is not literal. It
is not a literal threat or a
plan to do harm, um, it is just
a very stupid thing that is said
in the heat of the moment. And I
can see a lot of people saying
that stupid thing in the heat of
the moment.
And that's what, and, and, and I
think we had had this discussion
in, in 2022 when we had had
looked at this as well, and, and
that's why we had kept that
shooting threat at him as a
misdemeanor.
Um
And I, I think it is still
appropriate that that the
shooting threat remain a
misdemeanor because of those
kinds of circumstances. I don't
think that same thing is going
to happen with bomb threats. I
don't think that same thing is
going to happen with SWAT.
Um, but I, I think the shooting
threat is, is unique.
And we should, we don't want to
Make felons of people because
they have.
Bad tempers and say dumb things.
Um
And so,
My, my suggestion, Mr. Chair.
Uh, would be that we.
We amend this bill just to to
keep the, keep a bomb threat and
swatting as 4th degree felonies.
But to keep the, the shooting
threat as a misdemeanor as it is
now.
And so Mr. I can, I can kind of,
I can say with that. I can
recite the amendment, the page
and line numbers, or if we
wanted to, to go to the senator
before doing that,
if I respond to that. I think
your example is not good in this
bill at all.
Um, if you and Senator Maestas
got in a fight and you told
Senator Maestas you're gonna
shoot him, that would not
qualify under this at all.
Because this says that you would
have to intentionally
communicate to another person
intent to bring a firearm to a
property.
Or use the firearm with the
intent to place a person or
group of persons in fear of
great bodily harm.
So this is, this is written in a
way that it would apply to a
school just like a bomb threat
does.
Uh, this is written to where it
would apply to a church, just
like a bomb threat does.
Um, and right today.
Um, you know, we used to have
bomb threats all the time.
We really don't have a whole lot
of bomb threats anymore.
It's now shooting threats. The
main thing that we get at the
schools and that we get at
churches and that we get a
synagogues is calling in and
saying that you're going to come
and kill everyone with firearms.
Um, we don't see a whole lot of
bomb threats anymore.
Um, and, uh, the response by law
enforcement is a little bit
different, but it's the same
responders.
The trauma to the students in a
school is pretty much the same.
Um, and I, that's what the
intention of this is now, I
think DAs in their infinite
wisdom.
That's a little bit of sarcasm,
um, you know.
They're, they're going to know
the difference between, um, you
know, I was threatened a little
over a year ago by someone that
they were going to kill me.
Um
I didn't even report them.
Maybe I showed up, but I didn't.
Um, because I was pretty sure
they didn't mean it.
Because it was set in an
argument.
OK, um, I think that's there's a
big difference between that and
you threatening to come into
this building and kill all the
legislators in the building.
Right now, that's a misdemeanor.
and Mr. Chair, Senator, there's
definitely a big difference
between, uh,
Someone saying something dumb
like I'm gonna kill you, but,
um, and, and calling, calling in
a threat to an institution like
this, my problem is I think this
does cover both of those. So
that's, that's where
That's why I have that concern.
Um,
To the extent that I, I would
always hope that Diaz would
would use their discretion, uh,
but I, we can't write our bills
on that. We can't make our laws
on that basis. We, we have to
say.
At least the minimum standards,
um, that we want to have.
And, and, and
And also that it it is.
I think it would be unfair to
the practitioners of DAs, B is
law enforcement to not have
those minimum, uh, standards
established, uh, because they
need to know what, what rubric
of their they're working with
them.
Um, so I, I absolutely
understand what you're saying
and, and, and there's no
question that that those kind of
the threats that, that you are
worried about.
Do absolute harm and trauma,
and, and
Need to be, need to be addressed
and there should be consequences
for them.
But I worry that as drafted,
it's a little too broad and
we're gonna also sweep up.
The dumb kid.
Say a dumb thing that he's never
gonna do.
Um, and that sets, and then he
is involved in the justice
system, uh, going forward and
And it has real, real
consequences in a way that that.
That that that you, you are not
seeking to impose with
With uh your, your intention
behind the bill.
Um
So I would suggest Mr. Chair.
On page 2.
Line 15 before the comma.
Inserting the words or swatting.
And then undoing the strike of
the rest of that.
Language.
So it would read whoever commits
making a bomb scare or swatting
is guilty of a 4th-degree
felony.
And then same page two, line 17.
I'm doing all of the struck out
language.
And
Striking the added language.
So it would read the same way it
it reads now, which is whoever
commits a shooting threat is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
We just uh hear that one more
time.
Sure, so
the first part.
We
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
the intent is to make it so that
a bomb scare or swatting are 4th
degree felonies and a shooting
threat remains a misdemeanor.
And so by doing it, we would go
page 2, line 15.
After the word bombs, bomb
scare.
Inserting or swatting.
And then we would replace that
language that's been stru struck
after that saying is guilty of a
4th degree felony. So it would
read subsection D.
Whoever commits a bomb scare
swatting is guilty of a
fourth-degree felony.
And then
Line 17, we would probably be
inserting an E.
there
Um, and then otherwise,
Undoing the language that has
been struck, that whoever
commits and is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Putting that
language back in and striking
the added language of or
swatting is guilty of a
fourth-degree felony.
And then renumbering the
succeeding sessions, uh,
sessions.
Thank you
Senator, Senator. So essentially
your amendment.
Maintains
Current law for shooting threat.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, for a
shooting threat, but it still is
adding and swatting as 1/4
degree felony.
Thank you.
Ask whether the sponsor
considers the amendment
something that they would favor
or not favor. We usually do that
as a courtesy to the sponsor to
ask that I'm I'm tasked to do
that sometimes I overlook or
forget that, so anytime you want
to know, jump in and ask me to
recognize the sponsor. The
sponsor has indicated does not
favor the amendment. Senator
Maestas.
Oh, thank you, Mr. J. That's it.
No
Thank you. So let me see if I
understand this. So swatting is
actually an act, right? I mean,
you, you've already done that.
A bomb threat could
Could not be a bomb threat. I
mean, it's just somebody calling
saying there's a bump. So it's
almost like the bomb threat and
the shooting threat are kind of
the same. I mean, cause you're,
you don't, you know, you don't
know. I mean, if somebody says,
well, put a bomb there, but you
don't know if there's a bomb
there. And then the shooting
threat is kind of the same
thing, isn't it? Because you're,
you're saying that.
You know, you're going to shoot,
you may not, you know, I do,
I'll be honest, I do worry
about, you know, especially
Young people who, who, you know,
they're, their tempers.
Explode and they're, you know,
they've got all this stuff going
on, uh, with their hormones and
things like that, and we don't
want to put more kids in the
junum bottle, just, just the
system. You can call it that,
um, and, uh, so I would worry
about that, but I guess I don't
understand the difference.
OK, so,
So to the extent that they both
might be threats that aren't
that aren't true, that they're
not actually doing the thing.
They're the same in that, in
that sense, where I think they
differ.
It is really like.
Talking about firearms and
shooting.
is part of our vernacular in a
way that bomb threats are not.
So if I am a 20 year old kid.
And I, and I'm like I'm gonna
take my my gas, go to your house
and get you. And it's, and then
I am.
I am posturing. I am saying
something dumb, uh, maybe I'm
intoxicated, but, but that is
something that I think is a lot
more likely to be said.
Kind of in an off the cuff way,
then
I'm going to
I'm going, I've planted a bomb.
In your, in your building.
And uh, it is.
They're just they're, they're
talked about in different ways,
especially by young people in a
way that I can see the shooting
threat.
Be made
Uh, in an off the cuff weapon.
Way that is never going to be
followed through on in a way
that that a bomb threat, I think
is a little different. I don't
think.
I don't think people, I don't, I
don't think there's as much kind
of posturing.
Around bomb threats and around
shooting threats.
I also say I also don't that uh
if this is a misdemeanor, that's
still, that's still a year of
incarceration.
So if they did.
The drunk 20 year old does this
dumb thing, um.
It's not that there would not be
consequences there, there are
and should be consequences.
I just think that
senator, I have the floor.
Um
Oh, well, but consequences. I
there there is a difference
between, I mean, once you are a
felon.
That that has a a significant
impact on the rest of your life
in a way that.
That a misdemeanor, I think,
does not.
Um, and
And I think if you are calling
in a bomb threat or doing this
dangerous swatting.
That is appropriate.
I think the 20 year old
posturing.
Um, I'm, is considered the
collateral consequences of, of
making that a felony.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, I would almost
respectfully disagree with that.
I think in today's terms, I
actually hear sometimes more
often news we're gonna go blow
this place up or we blew it up
on the floor today. We never
really do that. So, you know,
or, or in slang and posturing.
I would disagree. I also want to
point out that the greatest of
school threats right now. The
reality is,
It's gun violence.
This, this school shootings and
after every school shooting.
We have these conversations of
trying to identify the
responsible gun owner.
And an idiot with a weapon.
And no responsible gun owner.
Is going to take these actions.
This is either an idiot with a
weapon or quite frankly an
idiot.
But either way, I would say that
That the threat of gun violence
is equal in my mind as a mother
with kids still in school.
greater than
And the bomb threats.
Today, I'd like to see all of
them held accountable, but that
we have a zero.
for threats.
Especially I would respectfully
disagree with that. I think they
should be held in equal weight.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
So when I look at the definition
of swatting.
Senator, uh.
It's saying swatting consists of
knowingly making a false or
misreading report to a public
safety agency.
Of an ongoing emergency or
threat of violence.
So it seems to me that we're
talking about that when we're
talking about shooting as well.
In other words, someone is
calling either.
A public safety agency. The
question I have with regards to
this is, uh, what if someone
calls into a school. That's not
a public safety agency. What if
someone calls into a school
because they, they just don't
wanna go to school that day and
this way they can have an
emergency, so it's gonna be a.
A shooter coming to your school.
Is that considered?
Swatting
Um
And I understand the rationale
behind this, and I actually
support this bill, I think this
is something that is definitely
needed since there's no law in
place right now in New Mexico.
But I want to get clear
clarification on the
definitions.
Yeah, the, the swatting and the,
and the shooting through are,
are very distinctly different
things.
Um, swatting is, um, and, and I
think Senator Duhey got that one
very right where um.
If I'm mad at Moe.
And um I called the police and
tell them that I know Mo's home
address and so I called the
police and say I, I heard, you
know, shooting and.
At this address.
I'm gonna say his name, but
then.
They're gonna send the SWAT
team. That's why it's called
SWATting, by the way, is they're
gonna send a SWAT team, SWAT
team's gonna break down the
door. They're gonna have their
guns drawn, but Mo has no idea
they're coming, and Moe's got a
firearm.
And so he's trying to protect
himself and his family like we
saw in ranch a few days ago.
Right?
And so Moe is trying to protect
himself and his family.
And now.
This is happening all over the
country.
And there's been a lot of deaths
from it.
Um, I, I call it, you know,
where I'm calling the police
department instead of carrying
that out myself. That's
swatting, that's in that is
what.
Um, when I brought that 4 years
ago, we would have been the
first state to address it now
most of the other states have,
um, but, you know, that's a
whole different story.
As far as the shooting threat
goes, you know, the main concern
is schools.
Right? That's the main concern.
Now the concern in the past has
been that this is a student.
Um, part of the time, that's
true.
But there's a lot of times
that's not true.
There's been a lot of times that
it's an adult.
Or a past student.
Um, and we see in the shootings
that actually are happening at
schools, a lot of times it's a
past student, it's someone who's
already become an adult.
Um, if you look at, uh, what
happened up in, uh Aztec.
That was a previous student
who's 20 years old at the time
and came back and uh I forgot to
tell Senator Lanier, uh, that we
were presenting this today, but
he was the teacher in the
classroom that was shot up. So,
That's happening all over the
place. Now, if we want, now
obviously to carry out the
shooting is a felony, right?
So, we already have that
covered.
But the threat of
When is treated the same. The
law enforcement all comes, the
fire department all comes, the
ambulances all come, the schools
go on shut on lockdown. The
results are exactly the same to
those students.
And right now we're calling that
a misdemeanor.
And I respectfully disagree
because I don't know of any
misdemeanor.
That anyone's gotten a year in
prison.
Yeah, they can get up to a year.
But you tell me when it's
happened. Maybe on their 10th
misdemeanor.
But that doesn't happen on their
first misdemeanor.
Something like this.
There's there's no difference
between it and a and a bomb
threat. We'd have to put a few
more words in.
Because we're identifying
something new.
But something that is very much
happening today.
And I will tell you
I've ran this bill for, what is
it 6 years now?
C
5 or 6
That we've, I've sat here and
run this bill.
And every single time, the
public and the press is like,
well, this is common sense.
Every single time.
Because they don't understand
the difference.
Parents don't understand the
difference, and they can't
believe it's just a misdemeanor.
To call and say you're gonna
come and kill their kid at their
school.
That's what this is about. Now,
if the language needs to be
tweaked a little bit. We're not
voting on this anyway.
We're gonna put it in an ominous
package. We can tweak the
language if we need to to make
sure it doesn't pick up the
casual threat.
Although I will tell you as
someone who's been threatened,
it's not so casual.
When you get in an argument with
someone and they decide to
resort to violent threats.
I don't know if you've ever had
that happen, but it ain't
casual.
In fact, I would say it is
assault.
Right? Isn't an assault when
someone does that anyway?
Right, so
This is covering when you call
school.
When you call synagogue.
When you call the legislature.
Me? I want to make sure we do
everything to protect our kids
in the schools.
I don't want to leave it a
misdemeanor. I want to make sure
it's a felony.
Kids get treated differently
when it's a kid anyway. They go
in the juvenile justice system.
It doesn't go on the record. It
gets expunged when they're 18.
this is one of the first bells
heard because you have been
patient about it. My
understanding was the amendment
that's before us was the
amendment we had adopted
previously. I don't know if that
is that your recollection as
well too year we passed this
bill exactly the way it is, as,
as it is without this amendment.
All right. Now, um, and the, and
the only other last thing where
I might disagree with you a
little bit thus far is uh the
notion that we're gonna
legislate a crime here by the
press. Uh, the, the press.
has been clamoring for a number
of things or the last several
years that are clearly
unconstitutional, so it's easy
to, and I don't, I don't mean
that to be disrespectful to your
comment, except that that um uh
the press doesn't usually hire a
lot of constitutional lawyers on
their, on their beat, um, and,
and, um, that's our job, uh, to,
to do that and we've taken that
oath to do so.
Uh, the, um, again, we'll, we'll
put this on the agenda for
action that are that are coming
next meeting and so I appreciate
you putting this on early for
us. Thank you.
Uh, the next bill, Senate 32
unlawful possession of stolen
firearm.
The
Oh, that's.
This is for this one here.
Was the chief here
towing cars tonight, is that it?
Lava
Uh, Senate Bill 32, consistent
with committee policies, uh,
Senator Ma just two individuals
have asked to speak, the chief
of police, Troy Wiesesler, who
is represented here, um,
And our part for the city of
Albuquerque. I don't know, are
they part of your time
allocation. Yes, yes, yes. All
right. Uh, you've got your 15
minutes in.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Try to
be shorter than that, um.
Mr. Chairman, honorable members,
this is Senate Bill 32, and it
creates the crime of the
unlawful possession of a stolen
firearm. As you know, Mr.
Chairman, uh, we have
Uh, receiving stolen property,
the crime of receiving stolen
property, someone gets busted,
you can't prove that they stole
it, but they have it, uh, and,
and if somebody has
You know, somebody's offense,
you know, a go between between
the stealer and the buyer or or
has a stash of stolen stuff.
Uh, they get charged under
30-16-11, which is receiving
stolen property, and they get
charged based on the market
value of the goods. So if it's
less than $250 it's a petty
misdemeanor, 500, it's a
misdemeanor, and so on.
Well, there, there is
distinctions in law on
particular ah particular items,
there's burglary tools.
Uh, 30-16-5 possession of
burglary tools, which is a
felony and presumably because
those burglary tools have no
market value.
But are very, ah, you know,
detrimental to to the community,
you know, for someone to have
burglary tools. Also,
Uh, possession of a credit card.
Because credit card is unique,
it's not a piece of plastic,
it's access to to cash and a
stolen motor vehicle, which is
not based on a market value, but
everyone's car is equally
valuable to them. So anyway,
this says that it's a.
If you if you get possessed a
stolen firearm, a firearm that
is discovered on your person
that is determined to be stolen.
Then you are guilty of a 4th
degree felony.
The, um
The proliferation proliferation
of gun usage and gun possession
in the past 15 years, as you
know, Mr. Chairman just off the
chart.
Just off the chart, um, uh,
something like uh 214.
Uh
Of the homicide statewide last
year were were were caused by a
firearm.
Um
In other states, Mr. Chairman,
there is similar statutes, uh,
so it's not, it's not anything
new or off the wall, ah, Rhode
Island has a statute, state of
Washington, uh, Illinois, uh,
Louisiana, uh, just to name a
few, in, in, uh
In Mississippi, this crime would
uh would be 5 years in prison.
In Louisiana, it would be
anywhere from 1 year to 5 years.
Uh, so this would, I think this
is reasonable of 4th degree
felony, 0 to 18 months.
It will allow law enforcement to
keep stats on stolen firearms
or, you know, there's like a.
And 2 stolen firearms if in fact
there's a company whether
they're stolen stolen items.
I'll turn it over to my guest
and expert witness to introduce
himself, say a few words.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is Rob
Hart. I am the director of the
Organized Crime Commission and a
deputy district attorney at the
2nd. Um, I think one of the
things I, I really just wanted
to come up here and assist that
way I can help answer questions
that arise, but the one thing I
will add, one of the struggles
when, you know, I was doing a
lot of these cases myself as a
line attorney is you find
yourself under the current
stolen property statute, you
find yourself squabbling over
value a lot, and, you know, when
you're relying on
Admissions or something like
that from the defendant, or are
you trying to bring forward an
expert on what this gun is
valued or that kind of thing,
because this is a lumped in with
all of the stolen property. It
just adds another layer of
complication when we have such a
plethora of these stolen.
firearm, uh, statutes. I believe
this would help our jobs uh be
easier, and honestly, it was
kind of a a known thing. If you
go to stolen property.
The way that the law currently
reads, most prosecutors, you're
gonna have a hard time
prosecuting it unless they just
come right out and say, yeah, I
know it's stolen, that's right.
I mean, it's normally not that
easy for us to do our job.
Um, so I just, I think things
like this make it simpler, make
it a lot easier, and there's so
many stolen guns that we're
dealing with all the time. Um, I
think it would be a very good.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, gentlemen. Before we go to
comment, uh,
There's approximately
250,000 gun thefts in the
country per year equaling close
to 380,000 firearms.
About 1/3 of gun owners have
experienced their guns stolen at
one point, uh, and, and the stat
in 2022, Mr. Chairman, 77%, 214.
Out of the 278 homicides in New
Mexico involved a firearms, so
this is just.
Uh, something we could do to
combat to combat those
tragedies. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee.
Nope, I cannot just do it.
Sorry.
OK.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I do apologize. Um, Al
Park registered lobbyist on
behalf of the not a singer, um.
Uh
I'll try for the 4th time and
the final time, Mr. Chairman, Al
Park, registered lobbyist on
behalf of the city of
Albuquerque, we stand in support
of this legislation, as you will
hear from the city, we stand in
support of all legislation that
is aimed at protecting our
communities, increasing public
safety, with that said, Mr.
Chairman, we also stand in
support of really the uh the
policy and the approach that
this committee is taking, which
is to address these issues in a
comprehensive fashion. We
recognize that the city of
Albuquerque, that public safety
and crime is not a silo. It is
not dressed simply by criminal
legislation, but also by
approaching it in what we
consider and what the city is
striving to do is approach it in
a holistic approach to also
address homelessness, mental
health, addiction, behavioral
health, public safety is a broad
umbrella. This is one part of
the tool and the city of
Albuquerque stands in strong
support of
all of the tools in the chest to
make sure that we can make not
just the city, but all of our
communities throughout New
Mexico safer, stronger
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
just got a couple of little
questions. Um,
On the 2nd page, person charged
under this section who is also a
felon shall not be charged under
Section 3716 for the same
offense. So if you, if you are a
felon already and then you have
a stolen gun.
So
Why is this in there, and what
does it really mean?
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Stewart, so we just
wanted to be fair. We wanted to
put a statute, uh, we wanted to
make it clear to the prosecutors
and the courts that this would
be double jeopardy. This would
be charging someone twice for
the same action. 30-7-16 is a.
I, uh, you know, the governor's
big.
Big statue of felon in
possession of a firearm, so it's
prosecutor under if, if, if they
found a felon in position, with
stolen firearm, they would then
have a choice of charging under
one statute or the other, but
So, um, Mr. Chairman.
That's not what some of our
mandate says I mean some of our
issues said the mandated
stacking provision, what is
that? Oh, forgive me, Mr.
Chairman Senator Stewart, so on
lines 2 and 3.
Each firearm possession is a
distinct crime. So under this
bill as written.
If someone got busted with 6
stolen handguns, they could be
charged with 6 counts of
possession of stolen firearm.
So must determined they could be
charged, but is it mandated that
they be charged for 6 fences.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, nothing
is ever mandated. It's
discretionary.
The criminal justice is
discretionary police.
Uh, prosecutors of a prosecutor.
Charged and convicted of 6, the
judge.
Could run them concurrent, uh,
so there's only 18 months as
opposed to
9 years.
But there's nothing mandatory
about it.
OK, thank you for that. So, Mr.
Chairman, my last question is,
um,
Can't they just say, well I
didn't know it was stolen.
Cause it has to be knowingly
possessing or transporting.
Well, I didn't know it was still
got it from uh Bob.
Next door
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Stewart,
yes, of course, that's, look,
that's the oldest excuse in the
book. I didn't know this was a
crime. I didn't know whatever.
The, the thing is, that's,
that's why this will still be an
uphill battle, I think in some
ways for prosecutors, because
that's what we have to prove. We
have to use the circumstantial
evidence. We have to use the
situation that we found the gun.
Sometimes the guns have been
modified, sometimes the serial
numbers have been filed off like
there there's a numerous
circumstances that could come
up, but you're right, we, we
don't generally as prosecutors
just count on the defendants to
admit everything and turn
themselves in.
It it's gonna be a challenge,
absolutely, but I think it
should be for stolen property
too. We don't want to overreach
and just start saying, oh, you
probably knew.
You know, arrest him, charge
him, right? I think that's a
fair burden on the state.
All right. Thank you. Thank you
for answering my questions.
Others are doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And so, um, I, I think that our.
Our analysis here.
I spot on about subsection C on
page 2.
Uh, which says that each firearm
possessor transported in
violation of the section
constitute a separate offense,
because while you could run it
concurrently or consecutively,
uh, if it is not, if it is run
consecutively.
You have 10 stolen firearms.
Uh, and they're all 4th degree
offenses. That is 18 years in
prison. That is.
That is, that is a first degree,
that's what we do for first
degree felonies, right?
I
First degree felonies, we, we
reserve for for our most heinous
crimes, um, so I, I do think
there's a proportion, a
constitutional proportionality
issue here, where
Either
This and and again, I'm, I am
not gonna propose this as an
amendment right now because I
think I assume we're going to
take the same approach waiting
for for Senator Wirth, um,
But either that section C would
need to come out, or it would
have to say it has to be run.
Um, concurrently.
For, for any, any.
Because otherwise you're gonna.
You're going to very quickly get
to a very high
That
that is not necessarily
proportional to the crime.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank
you. I, I respectfully disagree,
um, we're dealing with gun
markets, we're dealing with
people who are selling these
stolen firearms and they're
trafficking them across the
states or traffic, some of them
are going back to Mexico to be
used to kill people. Most of
these firearms are, they're
violent peddlers.
So
I actually, yeah, I, I don't
think that's a problem, right? I
think these stolen, this isn't
one person having a stolen gun,
OK, right. But if you are picked
up with 1020 stolen firearms,
you are dealing in death.
That is absolutely what you're
trying to do and you're doing it
with a reckless to, you don't
care what these firearms are
used for, and quite frankly,
they're not being used for good.
There's not so firearms that are
being used to save people. So I,
I would push back a little bit
but I don't if you truly stack
this up.
And Mr. Chair, I don't disagree
that someone who is is messing
around with stolen firearms is a
dangerous person, and they are
not doing it.
Or for good reasons. They were
doing the Duke ofmit crimes.
There's no, I, I have no doubt
about that. I don't think that
fixes your, your constitutional
issue, because also you're
saying, well, we are
You have, you, you can only
punish someone for, for
whatever.
They are actually convicted for,
not what you think they might
do.
With something
Uh, we, that's, that's just not
how our system of justice works.
And so, even if these are bad
people, these are bad people
that are probably gonna do
terrible things with that.
But if they, you're having, they
have not convicted for doing
those terrible things.
You don't get to say, well, then
that eliminates the proportion
the proportionality issue
because they could have. They
might have. They probably would
have done the terrible things. I
think you, the constitutional
issue is there.
Regardless, because otherwise,
so if I have 2.
So that means we will be
punishing someone with 20 stolen
guns, more than someone who
committed first degree murder.
Potentially
That's that, that doesn't make
sense with, with how we
One of the tenets of of our
justice system is, is that the
punishment.
That's the prime and this is
proportional and that, and when
you're looking at all of our,
our penalties altogether.
You should, they should make
sense. It should make sense that
the more severe a crime is.
The higher the penalty for it
is.
And we are that we would be
potentially equating first
degree with murder.
With having stolen firearms.
And, and those are, those are
not.
Those are not the same thing.
So, Mr. Chair, I, I will not
propose an amendment now when we
come back to it, I will, I will
propose an amendment to just
take out a subsection C.
Um
That's it, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Others on the committee at this
time.
Where we're at.
All right, see nobody else, I'll
just add a couple of thoughts
real quick. First of all, I
wanna thank all of the law
enforcement officers who are
here today, we appreciate all of
you being here and backing up
your, your deputy chief, um.
There was some mention about the
state police doing warrant
sweeps, I think in Albuquerque,
I think you all have done that a
couple of times a year of late,
um, that would be good for us to
hear more about that, I think, I
think that that my understanding
is that's been pretty effective,
and you've, you've talked about
the violent felons that you're
that you're arresting on warrant
status there.
Uh, Senator, do you know right
now, I've got to believe there
is some or or maybe with the
help of the prosecutor, um,
there's got to be some law that
somebody's charged with when
when they're arrested with a
stolen firearm. What, what is
the existing charge that's used
under our current structure.
Mr. Chairman Senators about
this, they would be charged
under uh
Uh, receiving and transferring
stolen property, so they would
be based on the market value of
the firearm.
And that, that kind of uh uh
deals a little bit with Senator
Doig's comments about volumes
and so forth. So I, I would
encourage you to give some more
thought to that senator again,
we dealt with this issue uh on
this committee, kind of with,
with an interesting debate and
discussion when it came down to
the retail crime uh legislation
that we saw recently and here
you go steal a razor. It's one
thing when you're stealing a
razor every hour, coming in and
out of the store every week or
every month and so forth, comes
a different situation entirely,
and I, I do share some of.
Senator's concerns that that we
need to have some
proportionality. I'll also, when
we come back to this, I'll, I'll
hope that um you all will have
conferred, I'm gonna say this to
everyone carrying a lot of these
bills, confer with the
sentencing commission, where
does this fit into the overall
scheme. I'm very careful always
here to stay in my lane. I don't
do criminal law. I don't know
whether a 4th degree felony or
18 years to send her Doggs an
example is the right penalty for
somebody uh committing this
crime or not and I have pretty
quick feeling.
That, yeah, maybe 18 or 20 years
for getting caught with 6
firearms that are stolen may not
be, uh, where we want to go. And
I know you, Senator, probably
don't want to see anything like
that either. I, I do understand
your, your point, which is that
prosecutors are always expected
to use their discretion at the
same time, I, when I read the
law it says um it says each
firearm shall constitute a
several offense, child to me
always means mandatory, but
we're getting realizing a
prosecutor can ignore that, um,
by the charges they bring but it
still shows that
legislative intent, right? I
mean, our legislative intent is
that every firearm would be
charged a separate offense.
Um, I, I want to spend a little
more time with you between now
and the next hearing on this.
Double Jeopardy section you've
got here, a person charged.
Uh, He shall not be charged
under section uh and then
there's a reference there to
this is the felon in possession
statute you said, that's of
interest because of course the
governor is pressed the felon in
possession legislation during
the special session, and we've
made repeated sentencing
enhancements for elon in
position over the last several
years, many times.
So I'm, I'm kind of curious if
we say, well, you're gonna use
this law.
To charge an individual with a
stolen gun, but that means that
you won't, you will not charge
them.
You must not charge them with
felony position, and there seems
to be a, to my mind maybe a
potential for disconnect. I'm
not sure why, um, we'd be
talking about well let's, let's
increase the penalties on felon
possession, but then say that if
you, you're gonna use your law,
we're not going to charge felony
possession. So I, I'm, I'm, I'm
trying to reconcile that in my
head a little bit. I'll talk
with you more about it. The,
the, uh, what is the current
penalty for a felony in
possession?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I
brought this. So fell in
possession would be 6 years, 6
years and so.
I'll defer to the prosecutor,
but I would opt to prosecute
under that statute because then
I don't have to prove the gun is
stolen. Right. So, so again, if
that's the case then this bill
is meaningless, isn't it really
factual scenario.
Um,
this statute probably would not
be, yeah, yeah, if you're
dealing with a foul, which is
what we talking about, about the
bad guys who really bad guys who
get caught with a stolen gun. So
we've been talking about here
all day long, and you're telling
me that scenario, you're
probably not gonna use this
statue at all. You're gonna
charge him with a felon in
possession, because that's a
6-year sentence, and here you
got a, you're making this a 4th
degree felony, which is what, 18
months maximum. So if we're
gonna get tough on crime, it
would seem this bill is almost
inconsistent with that, uh, when
you're dealing with a felon,
right, when you're
Dealing with a convicted felon
with a stolen, it's on fire,
which was the, was the bad guys,
right? Um, so that's, that's not
to say this isn't um needed,
we'll, we'll explore and talk
about that more, but, but I, I,
I am a little.
Um, puzzle whether we, first of
all, I guess my question is, do
you even need?
Uh, subsection D.
At all, because it's not always
an issue for a prosecutor to
decide which crime to prosecute
somebody under. You can't do
both, obviously. I know that
much about criminal law, right?
I would presume that you have a
lesser included offense, right?
Uh, it, it wouldn't, uh,
wouldn't this be a lesser
included offense?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, respectfully,
I don't, I don't believe so
necessarily because if you have
I think because um.
being a felon is a predicate
condition under this. So I think
it's, it's not this law that's a
predicate.
It is not, is not this. So I do
think you do need that
distinction
between the laws, right? It's
not a lesser included because it
doesn't have the to get to,
right? If you're a felon in
possession, you can have
lawfully obtained firearm and
still be guilty of the crime.
And that was my concern, Mr.
Chairman about
folks back at home, if it is a
lesser included offense, the
prosecutor would be forced to
prosecute and I was kind of
leery of that.
Because it's not a lesser
included, the prosecutor would
then have a choice if in fact.
And one more thing on that, Mr.
Chair, if it's a lesser.
A jury instruction will be
requested. You'll have to
include the less
you're going
and they're different fact
patterns. I don't think it makes
as much sense. Alright, thank
you for the clarification. Like
I said, I'll explore a bit more
with you, uh, sponsoring again.
A guy who does 0 criminal law,
you've got to be impressed that
at least I knew something about
law school from lesser included
defense. It's only 35 years ago,
so I remember some of that from
the bar exam, butt, thank you
for the present today and let me
before you uh finish up, I wanna
thank you for being here for the
DAs, um, and, and I don't know
whether you're here for the
association, but if not, please
get the word we, we want the DAs
to be participating more in the,
in the process of lawmaking when
it comes to crime. Uh, and, and
you may not have heard this, but
I expressed this in our last
committee meeting. We had a
special session.
We had a crime agenda. I didn't
hear anything from the DA's. I,
I never heard one DA say we
supported one of those bills,
um, and that mattered to me.
And we've got one last one,
right? Senator Brandt, uh,
Senate Bill 70, and we're gonna
have a hard stop just about
really 5 o'clock, right, same
two proponents, Senator Brand in
about 15 minutes with proponents
and hearing, please.
I appreciate it
So
I
um
But uh this bill came about as I
was listening to the legislative
finance committee.
The DAs were associations
presenting.
And they were asked what is the
one thing that we can do to
really help you guys stay in
Mexico and they brought up.
really bad.
really
They recommended.
Eco statue in another state.
Um, and I
uh
you know,
uh.
um
Enrico statute right now doesn't
cover.
As a RICO statute crime.
Um, one of our biggest issues in
New Mexico right now.
Uh, it has nothing in there on
games.
Um, which
He's also one of our biggest
issues in Mexico.
And ours are criminal
organizations, a lot of them.
and a gang, you probably are a
criminal organization, but that
is not what this says, OK? Um,
but
Those are some of the issues
that we're addressing here and
that's, I think about 10
different uh areas but, but
really this was the
recommendation of the DA's
association, we didn't change
anything because as you might
know, I'm not a lawyer and I
didn't play well on TV
and so uh
to boot all human. So.
the committee,
um, let me just say that
organized crime has changed a
lot.
The landscape the way we look at
the way we think of gangs
and territory like it is
anymore. Most of these criminal
organizations are savvy
businessmen, even,
even the juveniles young adults
and they're working together to
make money or something, right?
They don't care, they don't
honestly if they were legitimate
business because they're very
clever.
They're making
amount. Let me just give you an
example.
Um, there was a tunnel that was
discovered down south and the
southern border of New Mexico.
And
It was over $10,000 a head of
people that were being brought
across for 6 weeks, so, and that
sliver of time, 6 weeks is just
one cell, one group, one small
group.
Maybe $24 million.
Right?
That's what we're up against.
That's what state agencies are
up against. That's what DA's
offices, right? I mean, I think
I, I requested $5 million.
And when I see these guys,
that's one small route, right,
there's numerous cartels,
numerous.
That are making a lot of money
and so.
We need a racketeering act, but
we need a racketeering act that
reflects the type of endeavors
that are
being sought organizations.
They're they're sophisticated,
they're doing money laundering.
They're doing human trafficking.
They're gonna follow wherever
the most, uh, the best.
Opportunities
I know that.
Attorney General Torres had come
out and talked about how there
were parents that were selling.
They're doing it like a
business. So it doesn't matter
what level you're looking at
this, whether it's drugs
trafficking exploitation.
There's a lot of illicit acting
and the gangs are not formed
territorially, like I was
saying, they're form.
Via social groups online, right?
They don't necessarily have to
be in the same place together to
make money.
To update the statute and do a
better.
Thank you. All right, proponents
and for the state police chief,
you still there? That's somebody
new.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, managers, I will see,
uh, I'm real chief for the crime
suppression bureau for New
Mexico State police so I kind of
oversee auto theft, uh,
futureship apprehension unit,
narcotics, our criminal
interdiction unit. So we do
fully support adding these
additional lawsuits racing a
statute because at the end of
the day it's just also makes our
job easier to enforce these laws
is like our likes and
some teeth to our body and
Presenting these cases to the
OD's office for.
Thank you. Would you give me
your name and rank again,
please? Ah yes, sir. It's uh.
Gutierrez. And what's your rank?
Thank you, Major. Appreciate it
very much. Is that the first
time you're here?
That's what I thought I don't
recognize you, so welcome to the
committee. Everything you've
heard about us is true.
Um,
I'll park for the city of
Albuquerque.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
save you a bunch of time, uh, my
last comments.
Echo at the same time. I know
you're trying to get out of
here, so thank you very much.
If only you had been so succinct
when you were chairman of the
House Judiciary Committee.
not
Very much was and.
What,
what did you see? What did you
see another way of doing the
chair job, uh, perhaps so. All
right, members of the committee
with questions in about 5
minutes or 10 minutes, please.
So Senator Dewey is that a hand
up again, you're, you're doing
this very subtle thing. It's
early in the session, but when
when you're trying to get
recognized, you may want to be
able right what you said about
we don't want we're we're afraid
to hurt people's feelings here,
so I
it's not personal, um.
So, Mr. Chair, I know we, we
now, um,
We now we disfavor purpose
clauses.
But I'm I was looking at the
purpose clause of our rac
racketeering statute, because
when I
When I saw a lot of these things
that were added here, I thought.
Well, that's not what.
My understanding is that
racketeering is about.
Doing something for profit.
And how does
I was escaping from jail.
Cameroon Public records, so a
lot of this stuff does not tri
the, the, the human trafficking
part makes sense to me, but, but
a lot of these things don't make
sense to me as something that.
We is generally something done
for profit in a way that we
think about racketeering.
Um, there's certainly things
that could be illegal, uh, under
other statutes, but, but not,
not the kind and so I looked at
the our purpose clause for our
rapier statute, does the purpose
of the racketeering Act is to
eliminate the infiltration and
illegal acquisition of
legitimate economic enterprise
by racketeering practices and
the use of legal and illegal
enterprises to further criminal
activities, but
So I am, I am confused about how
a lot of this stuff, and, and I,
I hear what you're saying that
there, there are terrible people
out there who would sell their
children to be exploited and,
and that is Apollo.
Um, and that's also illegal in
all sorts of other ways other
than racketeering. So it's,
there are absolutely criminal
consequences for, for doing
that, um.
But
But a lot of the other stuff in
here.
Doesn't make sense to me as a
racketeering.
Offense specifically, um, within
the scope of, of this,
um.
I, I also have heartburn over
the criminal gang.
Definition. Under this, I think.
Oh gosh, this the.
The Senate Judiciary Committee
could be considered a criminal
gang potentially I do that.
Yes, um, it is, it is, uh.
I think almost any time you have
like 3 or more people, you're
gonna, it's gonna qualify as a
gang, um, and so.
So I think that is, that is
problematic. I think it's, it's
very broad, um, to, I think
there's a constitutional issue
with the First Amendment and,
and the right to free
association.
Um
As weird as it sounds, you have
a constitutional right to be in
a gang.
If you want to be.
We, that is, that is our, our,
you have the right to anytime we
are limiting that right.
We have to to look closely at
that because that will always
inherently and imply that
there's a constitutional issue
there under our our First
Amendment.
I'm also not sure why it's
needed cause I'm looking on page
5 and I'm looking at subsection
C, which is where you included
that, including that language of
including criminal gangs, but if
you keep looking, the rest of
that sentence that onto line 10,
it already says includes
illicit, as well as listed
entities.
So you could
You could capture a gang.
Under this illicit.
entity.
Provision already, I would think
I don't, I don't.
I think you create a
constitutional issue with the
criminal gang.
Definition and you don't need
it.
To accomplish what what you want
to accomplish because that
language is already in there,
so.
It's kind of a
Whenever we're implicating the
Constitution, I
There is a balancing to be done.
Um, I think that balancing
would, would.
would fail.
Um, it would, it would just be
unconstitutional because there's
no other.
Compelling governmental
interests.
To justify it. If we already
have language in there, that's
going to cover it. Um.
So, but I know that I mean.
Boy Scouts of America, some
people associated with that high
up in their leadership, it's
some very bad things.
I know this is the Boy Scouts
are a criminal gang.
Under this definition.
They are 3 or more persons
having a common identifying sign
or symbol or an identifiable
leadership who continuously or
regularly associate.
And then there's the in the
commission of Criminal
activities, and there were,
there were people.
In that group, we were doing so
in the commission of Criminal
Activities. And so,
I, I hear what you are saying
that we need a a a stronger RICO
statute, um.
The human trafficking makes
sense to me, but I think we
should, we should be doing it in
I think this still needs work.
Um, I, I, as, as it is, I think
it would be.
It would be very vulnerable to
constitutional challenge, and be
sweeping a whole lot of things
into our kind of Rico, uh,
concept.
That aren't appropriately.
Aren't aren't really
racketeering.
their crimes.
They're not racketeering.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. The um.
Thank you, uh, Senator Bran. A
couple things. One is if you'll
notice, uh,
This statute
was enacted uh
And last amended or has it not
been amended since 1980.
So I, I, uh, you know, on online
page 1 line 16, Miss Sherman
being laws 1980. Um.
So, uh, so I'm glad we're
looking at this statute. Couple
things uh on page 5 line 21.
I don't know if the bill
drafters, but the, the culture
of legge council is, but we
don't need to say uh.
You know, one of the incidents
occurred, you know, after
February 28, 1980.
Um
With our, you know, with our
statute limitation laws.
And now that we, we've amended
the, the homicide statute, you
can, um, and then also we have
Mr. Chairman, we have 30-42-1.
What was not amended and is not
part of this bill is 30-42-2, I
think Senator Doig may have been
reading from it, but
But I'll have to look at that to
kind of capture.
Our racketeering act.
And see if it's like a business
enterprise or just.
Or just a group of conspirators,
you know, I mean, cause, cause a
lot of these crimes that you
want to add to the list are kind
of conspiracy crimes, escape
from jail, escape from
penitentiary, escape from those
aren't necessarily
Profit
There's not a profit from that
activity. Uh, I, and I think
the, the key to this statue, the
key to, the key to the
racketeering statute is that's
an, it's an enterprise,
including a a legitimate
business.
You know, sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation,
business, presumably like an
LLC, a restaurant, a nightclub,
uh.
Uh, you know, whatever security
company, you know, bicycle
repair store or whatever. I
think that's what it's trying to
capture.
Uh, so anyway, I'll read a
subsection 2 and kind of.
And I think about it more. Also,
Mr. Chairman Senator Brown, I
think I agree with the Senator
Doig, the, the criminal gang.
is difficult
It's problematic to prove.
You know, you put on, you put on
an officer, officer, what do you
think about these folks? Oh,
they're a criminal gang.
And so, uh,
So that's difficult to prove for
one, and 2, I don't, I don't
believe it's necessary. I think,
I think on line 9, page 5, line
9,
A group of individuals
associated in fact. In other
words, you can prove that they
are in fact.
Uh, working together, um.
And then
With regards to uh the new
crimes are like the new crimes,
bottom of page 6, top of page 7.
Mr. Chairman, one is a, a 3rd
degree felony, the other one's a
1st degree felony.
I think first degree felony, uh,
The penalty of first degree
felony includes, you know,
second degree murder.
But to me that like nothing
should really pop that, but.
Why, uh, Mr. Chairman, why
weren't these just 2nd degree
crimes like the rest of the.
The rest of the crimes.
Where are the new crimes not
secondary crimes like the rest
of the statute.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, Senator
Maestas, there was a lot of
questions asked, so I'll try and
take them all in stride. um,
I'll start with your most recent
one. I believe the intent of
this is to go after the person
who is in the in the leadership
position, the person who is
actually
Kind of pushing everything
forward, running the actual,
your El Chapo, right? Your
person who's in charge of the,
the, the head, right? Because
Quite frankly, it, it's gonna, a
lot of this is driven by the
leadership, it's the people in
the position of power and, and
so I think the intent is that
We, everybody has a different
role in this, right? And that's,
that's distinguished throughout
this statue, right? I think
there's, there's even a
provision, like if you're, if
you commit a conspiracy to
commit.
racketeering, which is a crime,
that's a 3rd degree, it's not a
2nd degree.
So, depending on your role in
the enterprise, your culpability
should be different, and I think
that's what the statute is
trying to get at, as far as that
goes. Um, as far as the
enumerated crimes.
I could go line by line on each
of these and give you the
scenario, and I'm happy to do
that, but for example, the um
escape from jail.
You, it is profitable. There's,
if there was a guard system
where somebody was being paid
off and assisting with the
escape of a criminal, which is
something that has occurred and
will occur and isn't outside of
the scope of imagination, you
were part of an enterprise,
whether you're the guard who's
getting paid off, whatever,
you're part of a criminal
enterprise to allow somebody to
escape from jail.
So, I, I promise you, every
single enumerated crime in here,
but we're trying to get out with
a racketeering bill isn't too,
this is already a crime.
But if you are assisting with an
enterprise, for these enumerated
crimes.
And you've played a role in that
enterprise and.
And made money off of it.
There's, this is an additional
crime, right? It's that, it's
that enterprise component that's
culpable.
It's not just that you escaped
from jail. It's that you were
part of an organization and
making money off of helping
people escape from jail, whether
that was by taking bribes or or
whatever, right? Um, tampering
with public records, if somebody
in the government was paid off
to alter a public record, and it
was part of, let's say, a
transnational criminal
organization with a lot of money
with millions and millions of
dollars, paid somebody or was
like, this is our person who
changes things. If I'm
investigating corruption case,
it's all going to be part of an
enterprise and it's going to be
these and.
Eenumerated crimes.
Now it's not just
Anytime, right? It has to, there
has to have been multiple
occurrences of these crimes
within the same year.
But
I'm not trying to do some type
of scare tactic here, but all of
these are things that are either
active investigations or things
that have occurred in the last 5
years.
Within this state or.
I think actually all these have
probably occurred in the state
in the last 5 years. As part of
a group, not just a singular
entity.
Um, and, you know, I understand
that the gang definition.
It's actually in line with what
a federal definition of a gang
is. It's what
What law enforcement agencies
are already beholden to for
their intelligence capability
when they're like gang net and
things like that. This is the
definition they use. And I think
It's very important that you
talk about that it's the
commission of the crimes, right?
It's not just that it's a group
of people. It doesn't infringe
on the right to associate. It's
when a group of people is coming
together to specifically commit
one of these enumerated crimes.
It's not even just any crime.
Right? If it's something that's
not listed, it's not considered
racketeering. But if there is a
sect of the Boy Scouts of
America.
That are exploiting, sexually
exploiting children, and they're
making money off of it.
I think that that should fall
under racketeering, right? It's
an enterprise.
So, there isn't anybody who's
going to be
Swept up in this, if they're not
part of a criminal enterprise
that's committing these crimes.
And Dog's example, if this
committee was working together
behind the scenes to commit
criminal acts and being paid off
for bills.
Um, that would fall under this.
But since you're not, you don't.
OK, so, you know, I, I think we
have to be careful with our
examples, and we all tend to do
it. Be careful with our examples
that we're actually looking at
the complete definition. If
you're not committing a crime
that's covered in here.
Then you're not a criminal. It's
as simple as that.
If you are, and I, I tell you,
if, if my local Boy Scout
chapter in Rio Ranch in New
Mexico.
Is using those kids to peddle
drugs?
Then that Boy Scout leader could
be charged under this. That's a
criminal organization and should
be. I hope they are.
And not every Boy Scout club
would fall under this. And I'm
hoping none would.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brant. No, I, I hear that's,
that's uh somewhat persuasive,
but.
I think
proving that someone's a
criminal gang is an additional
element to proving whether
they're just associated with.
That's my point is that in my
opinion we don't need criminal
gang, you don't need to prove
that they have an identifying
sign or symbol.
On line 9 you just to prove that
they're associated with each
other. Anyway, and then lastly,
um,
Did you consider just instead of
adding these additional crimes,
did you consider just
eliminating
The enumerated crimes.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Mr.
Chair.
I think we have certainly
discussed that, right, but then
we are going to, I think then we
run into the other issue of are
we being too broad and sweeping,
I mean, it seems like when this
Originally when this law was
created, it was the intent of
legislator that there were
specific enumerated crimes, and
it wasn't that law enforcement
should just have carte blanche
and just say everybody's
associated, and you're out
there, right? It's specifically
sayselonies and not
misdemeanors, right?
I, I think
I, I don't, I don't think we
want to be overreaching. I think
that's the biggest problem. And
I think it would be.
I think most of us would agree
that it's better to add to this
if as crime develops instead of
just
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and if
you'll, if you'll kind of put
your
All your mafia movie had on the
all the listed crimes are kind
of what.
What organized crime did in the
70s, we got to ask ourselves.
What has changed in society, um,
and what's appropriate now.
But anyway, I appreciate the
answers. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Also I miss anyone?
All right, Senator, um, as you
know, we're, we're not going to
take action on this bill as yet
tonight. I am.
I want to begin by.
Dating myself, um, I carried a
gang piece of legislation back
when Mayor Marty Chavez was in
office and I see Senator Stewart
Noting her, she's carried one
too. We,
yeah, I remember you carrying
him and I carried him too. We
used to do that as a hazing
exercise, uh, for freshmen,
because she's nodding her head,
but once, once you start to try
and define what is a
constitutional prohibition on
gangs, you run afoul of the
right to association and that
becomes challenging.
And it becomes particularly
challenging because there are a
lot of court decisions which
have struck down legislation and
efforts to try and and uh
regulate or criminalize gangs
and I like anybody else, I
deplore gangs, one of the most
interesting things for me is
when we go into prisons, which
we do as legislators, will, will
go into prisons during the
interim and and um I'm always
asking what's the the um
saturation really of gangs in,
in a prison environment, so it,
it certainly is a serious
problem, and yet.
at the same time, when I tried
to carry that legislation when
Senator Stewart and others you,
you run into pretty quickly
civil libertarians that will
sue, um, and probably to
successfully when you don't do
this threaded and thread the
needle perfectly, and that's
hard to do. Um, I used the
opportunity simply to
Reiterate something that I think
I've said at the first meeting,
but you'll hear it from me many
times. There's two schools of
thought up here.
And, and I fall into one of
them, my school of thought is,
uh, contrast to those who think
that sometimes it makes sense to
introduce legislation even when
they know it's unlawful or
unconstitutional or going to be
challenged or enjoyed right away
because they feel there's an
importance to the message that
is, that is transmitted by doing
so, and I respect that opinion,
but I disagree with it. I, I
don't, I think that you
undermine your authority when
you, um, say you're gonna ban
guns, um, and knowing clearly
it's unconstitutional, but.
You're sending a message and at
the same time, I think you
undermine, we undermine our
authority and, and public
confidence and that's when we do
that, and but they're, it's a
legitimate thing that someone
want to do to send a message
with legislation. I'm just, I'm
in the other camp, I, I want to
legislate things that are that
are gonna be lawful for, so I
say that to you, because again,
I, I think that while I
appreciate what you're trying to
do here, I'll be pretty mindful
of the constitutional
limitations on the right to
association and trying to make
sure that we don't pass a law
that simply just doesn't ever
get held up when it's uh.
When it's challenged and anytime
a law is passed and challenged
in court, there's a lot of
resources, a lot of lawyers. I,
I went to the hearing in
Albuquerque where the ban on
guns was challenged, 30 lawyers
in the courtroom, probably, uh,
and a federal judge and.
Piles of briefing that were, you
know, a foot or more in
thickness and, and you just
shake your head cause you
realize the amount of resources
and time and energy that goes
into some things that are that
are clearly just an exercise in
futility. So, um, that's not to
say that's your bill, uh, but,
um, but I encourage you to work
with some of the comments here
today to try and make sure we we
get there and I again I wanna
reiterate my thanks to the
district attorneys for being
here. They're the example that
was given about a wall, uh, it
was given, um, and, and uh what
60.
6 weeks, is that right? Of, of
immigrants coming under, under
the tunnel, I'm sorry, under,
under the tunnel 66 months, 66
weeks of a tunnel, um, and then,
of course, it occurred to me,
it's like, well, you have a
tunnel with immigrants coming
under the border in the tunnel.
Somebody should build a wall and
make Mexico pay for it, uh, but,
but, but, uh
Oh, I wish all of you could see
Senator Bradley's expression.
That's, that's a dirty look and
I've been married more than 30
years.
I know that that dirty look is
about, but you know, uh, let's
build walls and then somebody
will build a title, that's
always been the right, the, the
response to that too, so
interesting that uh that they
got away with it for 6 weeks and
maybe, maybe we'll figure out a
way to stop that from happening
to.
Someday. Any event, uh, anyone
else for today, Senator, uh, you
want something else to say here
at the end? I know you think
that I know.
No, of course not. That wasn't,
that was my point. You and I did
have a chance.
No, no, no, of course not. You
know you wouldn't.
No, not, not at all. In fact, I
do not take offense to that.
Good. You and I had a good
discussion during the special
session,
you know, we're not married to
that definition.
I, I think had a very good
point. We probably don't need
it.
If it's, if it's the definition
in federal law, it can, you
know, it's a definition that's
sitting, you've talked about
before, it's, it's precedent
already.
So if we want to remove that
section.
Let's talk about that when we do
the ominous bill. We have no
problem removing that.
Yeah,
thank you.
No, and I appreciate you doing
this special session, talk to
me, how come you didn't hear my
bill, and I, I said, if you look
at page 6 of paragraph D, it
says it's unlawful for a person
to solicit or coerce another
person, including a minor, and
becoming or continuing as a
member of an enterprise, and it
goes on from there but, so then
I told you, well then you have
to look at the definition of
what is an enterprise, because
this makes it a 3rd degree
felony to solicit or coerce a
person into becoming a member of
enterprise then I look.
the definition of what is an
enterprise on page 5, and
enterprise includes any business
or corporation or labor union or
association or legal entity or
group of any persons, uh, who
are associated even it says even
if they're illicit or illicit,
right? So by my, by my reading
of this literally, if you're
going door to door and listening
for your church, um, your
committing a felony here, if
you're, again, the Boy Scouts,
you're committing a felony if
you're doing any number of
things, uh, where you are
soliciting another person.
And becoming a member of that
enterprise, uh, again, if you're
trying to register people to
voters, I think, right, if
you're going to go door to door
trying to solicit people to join
the Democratic Party, your
soliciting.
Uh, a person into becoming a
member of an enterprise, an
enterprise being defined as
anything like a labor union or a
corporation, which would include
a political party, so I, I
realized that we can sometimes
be uh thought to be absurd here
with the way we literally read
laws, but that's what we do. We
we're lawmakers and so we're
literally
right, Mr. Chair, it, it's,
it's, it has to be.
Well, the problem for you is the
word or.
Uh, when you have the word or in
there, you're creating a
disjunction, so you're saying
member of enterprise or
participating in a racketeering
enterprise, so you're incorrect
and you're reading the or this
is a disjunctive, right, so it's
enterprise or this other thing.
So, because of the word or, uh,
any solicitation of a member of
Enterprise becomes a felony, and
so that, you know, it's
fascinating, everybody used to
joke about Bill Clinton and his
deposition when he says it
depends on the definition what
is is, uh, here the inclusion of
the word or.
Makes um a solicitation of any
enterprise uh a criminal a third
degree felony. So I, I
appreciate you're trying to make
that distinction, but the word
or blows you up.
Right.
All right, uh, good meeting, I
think, I appreciate everybody's
good thoughts on CYFD. I hope
you find these hearings useful,
uh, the president of the Senate
will repeatedly remind me not to
get behind on our bills, uh, for
the sake of these hearings, and
I'll try to do both. I'll try to
have some good hearings, some
good, uh, opportunities to learn
things and expose things that we
should be exposing. I, I got a
message.
Uh, two things. One is the
sentencing commission met after
our last meeting where we
brought in the sentence
commission and told them we
wanted more participation at a
meeting, uh, Tuesday and they
took they took votes on various
pieces of legislation, so that's
good. We've engaged them a
little bit.
Uh, the other thing, I don't
think it's necessarily
responsive to our hearing today,
but I got a message from the
secretary earlier that the two
police officers who were uh uh
uh whatever resigned or
terminated or whatever from
Albuquerque's corruption scandal
and employed by CMD, I'm told
that they're perhaps being
reviewed by CYF and D. So these
hearings sometimes have uh, I
think some intended effect.
Right.
Thank you all very much. Thanks
for your meeting today.
We'll look at them and we'll see
what, yeah, I mean, it depends.
