Um
Should not minute minimize the
kind of checkered history this
facility has That's all. I'm for
it so forth and thank you If
that's the question, sir.
Mr Chair.
I don't run prisons.
And I realized that I didn't
mean to minimize anything.
The corrections Department, I
think or or are really trying to
do a good job. The employment is
up for this this facility now
it's it's getting higher. It's
it's a little hard to attract
people.
To Clayton because of the
housing situation. I think we've
made some progress with that.
You know?
On the side note. There was a
wind. Uh, developer that came to
the city of Clayton, wanting
them to build
Housing for those win, Uh,
workers? Well as you can
imagine.
That didn't go over with the
with Clayton. Very well.
They're trying. And in this
Particular deal. They're trying
to figure out how they can get
more housing there so the so
that people can stay there.
There is some onside housing.
That they're using.
And so hopefully something can
be done further with that. The
labor problem as I stated on the
floor today, there's a labor
problem across the whole state
agency everywhere.
Doing everything and especially
jobs that aren't real well,
light.
I would like to if I had my
rather's senator, I would up
this pay scale for these prison
officials because I think
they're they're underpaid. But
that is also an HR problem and,
uh, state personnel problem.
They need to give me direction
or where that should be.
And then by Iron mental
apartment. I'm getting way off.
Subject, Mr. Chair. I'm sorry.
Senator. What?
What kind of inmate it's
currently in this facility. Is
it a medium security? It's a
medium security. It's a medium
security range of different
adults.
Yeah, it's a male, medium
security state state inmates or
do they also have federal? They
are stadium mate State think
it's all state inmates. Thank
you Had a motion for a do pass,
all right, And before we we will
take that motion before us. We
still have a little bit more
debate instead of working then
Senator dude.
Thank you, Mr Chair and senator
words. I just want to clarify my
understanding.
This has been discussed for a
while, but it hasn't happened
yet Correct at the state's done
the person the disagreement on
this where I understand it,
Senator Worth Mr Chair.
Is that the paper the state
General Services Department.
They tell me
We've got a signed agreement.
That we can have this prisoners
prison bought if we pay off the
bonds strictly straight across.
As you know.
At least purchase agreement has
to come through the legislature.
I don't know if you all remember
one. I don't remember one.
I think I'm trying to give the
city of Clayton's and
negotiating are here to get some
more than to pay off of the
bond.
I think they're actually and and
I'm I'm for one to say, because
I'm not doing the bond work.
Better. There is some
discrepancy on how much it would
take to pay off the bond. There.
They have got 34 million.
Tied into the budget right now
for this purchase.
I'll tell you that.
Trade up Mr Chair when you say
they the state does or the town
of Clayton does the straight
doesn't appreciate that. My
recollection and this issue.
When we discussed this and I,
it's too bad. The secretary is
not here because I distinctly
remember having the discussion
about if we're going to do this.
There is no way we're going to
go into business of housing.
You know, undocumented
immigrants in this whole issue,
and there was assurance that
that was not going to happen if
the state purchased this
property.
And so again, I That's my
recollection, but it's been over
a year since
We were there, but I think that
would address the issue that
Senator doings raising and
Senator O'Neill the whole
history here and one of the and
this. All this was done under
Governor Richardson supposed to
create jobs and
Again it needs it needs help.
And
I'm certainly willing to support
the bill now. But if if, in fact
the state's going to go into the
business of doing
You know, relationship with
immigration to house folks,
That's the whole direction is
going to be hugely problematic.
And I, and I think my
recollection is that there was
an assurance that was not what
was gonna happen.
So I just want to flag that.
And I'm not sure if you've got
any other signal from
Clayton or the department about
that. I have got no direction on
that at all.
The secretary did.
Give me somewhere in here. How
many inmates were there right
now? But the population has gone
up some. I don't know exactly
why that is. But I have heard
nothing about any, um
Noncitizens going in there? I
haven't heard anything about, uh
A
Citizens from other states
coming in there, so I just asked
Mr Chair that you follow up with
her, and she's getting
Just let her know the concerns
raised and just confirm that
that's correct. The plan is not
to go hold federal immigration
Appreciate that. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator Worth out.
Certainly check into that.
Others on the committee
questions consider, dude. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Um
Can you talk a little bit about
How the appraisal for this was
done.
Uh, well, I guess my
understanding is lfc saying it
should be 34,000 or
34
Million.
Uh huh. And so what? And and I
What is the that that $20
million discrepancy, Okay.
What has happened.
The LFC.
And General Services is saying
we have a contract for 30 or the
bond pale
That's what they say.
I'm not a lawyer, but I have
looked at those polices.
And I don't see that. I know
that that has to be legislative
approved.
I don't remember doing it.
I don't remember seeing it come
through. I would think that I
would notice it if it was
something to do with quite so
there's no
Least purchase agreement until I
can see that least purchase
agreement.
And so with that
You can't pay more than
appraised value. The appraisal
was done last year, it was done
for General Services Department.
It was 53 million something
And that's where I derived
rounded up to 54 said Anything
they didn't spend could be
reverted, and that's where I
came up with that figure. That's
the discrepancy. Do we have a
signed contract?
To purchase this for 34 million
If not, I'm asking that we pay
appraised value.
Or negotiated value at least two
to help the city of Clayton.
And Mr Chair Senator Act.
But
Is with 34 million with that pay
off the bond debt.
General services thanks that
will pay off the bond debt.
The figures I got from the city
of Clayton. They sent their
financial people out, and they
thought it would be closer to 39
million at all depends on the
day you pull the trigger as to
exact cost.
So that's the discrepancy.
That's another discrepancy that
you know, financial people will
have to figure out. Mr Chairman
and Senator, do it and Mr Chair,
Senator, I get not wanting to
That that it's only going to be
proved for the amount that we we
pass here and and not wanting to
undercut that.
But $20 million over
Seems, seems off. That seems
like a pretty big margin.
Ah!
What I
I don't know. I'm I'm
uncomfortable with others.
So I'd like to jump in little
bit myself, and I think there
may be an amendment worth
considering, but we'll come to
the amendment a minute center.
Word started this.
Remember the history of this
from the very beginning the
richest in administration built
the prison out there with a lot
of criticism and opposition at
the time because of the thinking
that it was in a remote part of
the state, where there would be
difficulty with transportation
and housing and
Employment so forth and the
thinking on the flip side of
that was that that would be an
economic driver for the
community.
I think we have to always ask
ourselves whether we want to be
thinking of corrections as an
economic development tool for
the state of New Mexico, But
that's the way it was presented
at the time, and there was a lot
of lot of opposition to that
simply because of the location
of the time.
And at the time it was also
being pushed. I think you said
this right, but if memory serves
me right, it was a private was
to be a privately owned or
privately operated facility. So
the operator of that also had a
profit motive.
Um, behind promoting of the
project as well to make money.
Maybe they did. I don't know.
Then, um, and whatever reason
that that didn't play out the
way that
We thought it might.
I think it's important for us to
know that history of a little
bit about the history because we
have to learn from the
experience. Yesterday. We
Went back to a board of
education and the secretary of
education after years ago, we
had that and we flipped back to
Various models, and we go back
and forth in Mexico like we're
chasing our tail.
And I think to avoid continuing
to make those same mistakes over
and over. It's important for us
to look at what happened here.
And maybe you learned from the
experience. That's all. This is
a little bit beyond your bill,
but it gets to senator do wigs.
0.2
because
You sort of answered my
question. Um
But the language is troubling in
this bill right now is that
there were specifying in the
bill itself the price we say the
price to be paid for it is a
price equal to the appraised
value the facility. That's what
this bill says.
I say this with no no partisan
intent, but
But all we need to do is read
the paper every day to know that
developers and property owners
can appraised value of property
very differently than its actual
value. Uh and take advantage of
tax, um, opportunities or miss
valuations or
We'll also find a valuation of
property for any number of
different purposes. Better loan.
Better credit. So I'm looking at
the bill here, and I'm just
wondering on that on that line,
21 and 22. What would happen if
we just took out the
The language after the word town
of Clayton.
Because the bill here says that
they would pay for pay for the
price equal to be appraised.
value the facility and you sort
of answered my question, which
is who did who did the
appraisal?
You're a businessman, Senator.
Your I'm a businessman. You and
I know that we can get to
different appraisers. And
whoever does the appraisal may
get a very different result than
another for whatever purpose
that makes trying to get a high
appraiser. I'm gonna I'm gonna
direct the appraisal. Uh, in a
certain direction. I want to low
appraisal. I can
Make some room there, too.
So the question is first of all,
who does the appraisal and for
what purpose And with what?
Direction because you can get
very different, wildly different
results.
I think you answered that The
appraisal was done by the
department. Yes, sir. Mr Chair
if I could just elaborate on
that.
That's a funny question that you
say because I have the same
wonder.
And so not funny Senator. If you
don't have the same wonder it's
Was out of farming.
But the pressure
So I called one of my trusty
advisor.
Senator Novell.
And ask him.
I said.
Of their pressures and farming
tonight.
Which would you pick to do an
appraisal because
Senator Nobel used to do
appraisals.
It was his job, and he told me
he gave me a guy's name.
When I got the appraisal.
That was exact guy that did the
Fraser
So we have two things. We have a
request for an appraisal by the
department.
And, uh and, uh,
At least a recommendation of a
good guy to do the appraisal.
And it I'm pretty sure in terms
of appraisal, it was a
replacement cost new.
Appreciate it. That's what it
was and Senator as you just
point out. There's there's
different ways to do an
appraisal, right so you can do a
replacement value can do.
Economic returns. There's a lot
of different ways to do an
appraisal and getting completely
different results, and as I
said, you're nodding your head
as businessmen. We know that how
I totally appraiser. I want the
appraisal to come out high low
to my benefit, using whatever
methodology I can greatly
influenced the outcome of an
appraising well, so it just
seems to me that one
consideration would be in the
bill that we don't specify that
the purchase would be for a
price.
Equal to the appraised value of
the facility.
Um, And if we take that language
out, then I assume that the
department will do purchase and
negotiate that at some arms like
process of procedure, because I
I'm a little bit like Senator
Doig.
What we're talking about here is
paying appropriating money.
To pay the city of Clayton.
Some for the for the facility.
But they'll use part of that to
pay off the bonds and the
dollars or so into the city. And
that may be okay. That may be
what we what we intend to have
him. We might as well least
acknowledge. That's what's
that's what's being proposed
here. Part of that one of the
questions I had is is, did we
That we build a facility from
inception with capital outlay
funds was this done by governors
capital like Governor
Richardson or was it done by
legislative? Absolutely. Do you
know whether the original was
this was built from the, uh,
bond sales of the city of
Clayton?
The city of Clayton built this
And and guaranteed stood up the
bonds themselves, Mr Chair and
I'll come to you somewhere. I'm
just my question Was any part of
this, uh, build or paid for by
Capitol hallway Funds, meet up
with the answer that Mr Chair? I
don't think so. I think the
guarantee was the state
guaranteed inmates in the
facility, which we weren't able
to meet. So we were actually
writing a check.
To make up the difference. Thank
you Send word and that's what
that's why again. I think it's
important. We take that deep
dive into this experience
because
We seem to make this mistake my
experience with you, Maxwell out
when we get into the business of
business as a government, we
have the government playing
business people, and they
usually in way over their depth
is is my experience and that's
what sounds like it's happened.
There was guarantees made about
Prison inmate population and
when that didn't happen, we
started
Essentially paying for the empty
beds as as the states what it
sounds like center worth what
you're describing that we're
paying. We're paying for empty
beds to meet the guarantee and
the guarantees in place because
of the bond obligation, just bad
business Center, But in any
event, I'll go because I see
Senator Ivy, so the nose with
questions but give some
consideration to that suggested
amendment.
Online, 21 and 22, which is just
just authorizes an expenditure.
You get the 54 Million from
finance, maybe folks or
otherwise.
It authorizes the sale.
But it doesn't specify the
price. And right now your bill
specifies the price the price
that is the appraised value.
And and like, say, do it like a
couple little concern about
that? That's alright,
And and like, say, do it like a
couple little concern about
that. All right. Well, thank Mr
Chairman. It was true. And I've
got another thought on what the
pressure will be.
Oh, which is oh, price equal to
the current outstanding that
O'Donnell facility
and that way the city Clinton is
how harmless they can move
forward.
Stayed on set.
They don't make a profit.
They're not burdened by it.
Is there a question Mr Chairman,
Center Woods Until I saw the
look on your face. It was, But
this is this. This is a very
commission chair, Senator
Harvey. So to this is the very
deal.
That
The city of Clayton has
heartburn about
It's because
Is no purchase agreement. What
you're proposing is a purchase
agreement at a bond sell out
price.
City acquaintance fields as they
need some more money.
Before the obligation they made.
Ideally, ideally, Mr Chair,
crabby Soto, ideally.
They would just let this
I don't
They would just let
But this state keep right on
with her bond payouts just like
it is today.
And when the facility has paid
out
Just keep leasing it to the
state.
Ideally, that would be the
perfect thing for Clayton never
to sell this.
But just to keep until the
facility is decided it wasn't
viable for prison.
That would benefit the city of
Clayton more than anything.
But the state
As other ideas.
I've heard anywhere from a
savings of 6 million to a
savings of 1 million to do
exactly what you're talking
about The bond off
And we now own the prison.
And
We save money because of the
different transactions that go
But I asked you this and and I
guarantee you know the answer.
You're gonna give me before? I
even asked the question and I'm
not supposed to ask questions.
But I ask you this
Will you sell your house?
Blow praise value.
So, uh,
And and actually, Mr Masterman
Center Woods out. I'll answer
that question. I did not buy my
house as a governmental entity.
And I did not by my house.
For the purpose of warehousing
other human beings other than my
daughter.
Uh and so and so that's a that's
a different situation.
Ah!
The
Ah, as it is written right now,
I can give you the appraised
value.
I will tell you right now,
exactly what will come up as an
appraised value. It will come
out exactly the 54.
That will be the appraised
value.
That's the amount of money
that's available. That will be
the praised so so.
Uh,
So if we're gonna put appraised
value then then I think we
already know the outcome.
Uh, just like we could, we could
we could put the outstanding
debt of the other option is what
Senator
Cervantes has has suggested.
But otherwise we are we're
paying the price.
The other way, so
Thank you, Mr
Others.
Do it again.
And Mr Sheriff.
I don't know if you're gonna
anyone's gonna move the
amendment, you suggested, but
Based on senator Worths comment
that there was a commitment not
to use this facility to house
immigration detainees.
I would like to suggest an
amendment that includes that
same that would be
Wherever the period ends up
being on its on line, 22
I had an comma provided the
facility will not be used to
having off ahead and move that
that would just make sure that
we're
Sticking to the commitment that
it sounds like
Has been made on this issue.
Famous facility.
Senator. So we do this plainly.
You're proposing an amendment to
the language that I had proposed
an amendment. My amendments not
yet been adopted, right? So so
it may not work quite as
splitting unless you want to
make the whole thing. Why don't
you just make it all of it? If
you're really that, just make it
all as one proposed amendment,
Okay, So, Mr Chair, I moved it
on line, 21.
We strike the remainder of the
line after the word, Clayton
And Strikethrough line 22 and
then before the period insert
comma provided that the facility
will not be used to house
immigration detainees.
Promotion amendment before the
committee.
Repeat that again, please, sir,
Right? Sorry.
Yeah, I put you on the spot.
No, I don't put me on the spot.
Mr. Chair of
It. It actually.
Is what they were offering.
It only makes it better.
For for you for for your eyes.
It doesn't do anything for my
district.
So
You know, uh, either accept your
amendment.
Or my bill fails if it fails.
They don't have the right to buy
the facility.
So that part might be good for
me.
It might be good for the city of
Clayton because it goes on until
someone carries a bill that says
they're going to buy it.
So I'm in a perplexing situation
now, do I have any negotiating
power here?
You know if it if it is a, uh, a
negotiating power, maybe I
should say, well, how about a
different amount?
And it will appraise for
whatever I say, because I've got
knowledge that that's the way
it's gonna be.
So
I propose
With your amendment that we put
praise value.
Are the value of the deal say at
At 5 million over the payoff.
Alright. So the sponsors not
really giving us a yes or no
favorable or unfavorable. That's
OK. I understand you're
negotiating here, Senator. Good
for you. Uh oh, you're you're
only playing with about $20
million in taxpayer dollars, but
it's fun. Isn't it playing
monopoly? Alright, sir, Center
do and others that are Stewart
And then Senator Morris, were
you on this too?
No story.
So, Mr Chairman, I appreciate
all the conversation and
everything and the amendments.
But this is not a statue. This
is a simple appropriation bill.
None of the words anybody puts
in here is going anywhere or
will mean much.
Because this is just money in
the budget.
The only language they'll put in
if this were to passes.
Ah, just the stuff appropriating
it, Clayton.
So I mean,
Amending an appropriation bill
is sort of useless.
Oh, that's it.
Kill anyone else.
I don't know the answer that
it's kind of an interesting
point to me if we have if we
pass the appropriation, which
says you'll buy it for the
price, equally appraised value
is that binding. I said her
story like you're saying that's
not binding.
No, I'm not. I'm not saying
that. I'm saying that this
language is not going anywhere.
It's not going into a statute.
There's no reference to
anything. This is just a bill
that goes to the money People
the appropriations to say yes or
no. And if they would say yes,
they would put $54 million into
one of the back sections or
something of the budget.
And say to purchase the
correctional facility in Union
County.
They're not gonna
Put in the language that Senator
do his quads there. They're not
going to redo it, too. They may
redo it to do it differently the
way you're suggesting, but
This is just a little
appropriation bill isn't going
anywhere anyone else.
Interesting debate.
Yeah, the
I don't see anybody else on
here. You have the the challenge
from the senators again that
we're talking about $20 million.
What? We're really talking.
Roughly seems to me that the
bonds have been
Pay down over the years to get
down to that.
Current balance on those bonds.
And the payoff payoff on those
bonds has come from the state.
To some degree, you know, it's
the state's been paid to pay for
empty beds, so the bond
obligation could be met. But the
benefit of this would go to the
city of Clayton.
In other words, the difference
between the payoff on the bonds
and the
And what would be the appraised
value.
So the beneficiaries would be in
the city of Clayton for about
$20 million, But the
But the equity if you will that
was built up in the facility was
really paid for.
By the state.
By meeting them. That seems a
little off to me, but we're on
the amendment. So, Mr Chair and
Senator
So that payment for the empty
beds was that some sort of a
contractual obligation from the
state to the city of Clayton. Is
that what that is? That was a
contractual obligation to the
private
Uh, operator of that facility,
There was a private operator
that ran this facility for
years.
And the state paid that.
Operator. The operator in turn
paid the city of Clayton.
So
Yeah, I guess you could say
that. But then I still go back
to the fact if I can elaborate,
Mr Chair
If you have rental property.
There's your renter owned the
property after your mortgage is
paid off.
There's the senator and thank
you, Mr Chair and senator and
that that's kind of the point. I
was getting, too. I think it is,
um
The fact that the state was
fulfilling a contractual
obligation to this operator, and
that in turn created an equity
if you will for the city of
clean.
And now the city of Clayton will
benefit from that is similar to
Thousands of transactions in
this state.
Where, just like you said a
renter. A tenant? What have you
could think of other service
contracts Where
You make a payment? Where does
that payment go if they paid
into any hard asset, it's going
to create some equity value in
it.
And you can't then say that I I
guess it's true that the state
would have paid for some equity
value that would benefit clean
now. But isn't that true for
Many other industries. Many
other contractual obligations
created in business. Um, it
doesn't seem like, uh
That this is any different than
that.
Um
In addition to that, you know, I
tend to disagree that just
because this says 54 million
that that is going to be the
appraised value of the facility
and and that could be easily
remedied by, you know, getting
more than one appraisal on the
facility. If that's the case,
the insinuation that
That because we put 54 million
in here that there is going to
be some nefarious activity that
would force the appraisal to
come in at the maximum number
dollar figure that is placed
into the budget. Um gosh, I hope
we have a little bit more faith
in our system than that.
Um So I mean, if this doesn't
get paid out if the appraisal
comes in at
30 million or 25 Million, or 40
million. Say then that 14
million just reverts right back
to the state. And I think that,
um that that's definitely a
possibility here. So, um, I
don't see it as writing a check
and the entire amount off for
this property.
When an appraisal is going to
determine that, and if we don't
like that language, let's put in
two or three appraisals. Let's
That's what's usually standard
in some, you know, in a purchase
agreement of this sort that I've
seen anyway, as you say, Hey,
let's get three appraisals and
we take the middle one.
Or the high one or the low one
or whatever it is, but you can
instruct the division the
division on the type of
contractual obligation via
purchase agreement that they
should enter.
With the with
Thank you. Anyone else are doing
again? So, Mr Chair
Uh, two things one. I'll modify
my motion just kind of split up
the taking out that language
that you referred to and then
about the language that
That I am suggesting because
they're 22 distinct issues. I
think
I'm also looking at, um HB two
from last year.
And I'm seeing all of the
appropriations contingent on
Enactments of bills.
I
I feel like we do do
appropriations that are
contingent on something else.
Which makes sense. It would be
pretty odd if we couldn't do
that as a state.
So if I I understand that the
protests point about the
language, but I think it is
still worth putting.
Some language in there that
would hold
Hold us to the commemoration
detainees there so, but I'll
modify my motion. The first
motion is
Uh, so Page one line 20.
Or no, I'm sorry Line 21
after the word clock, Clayton
strike the remainder of that
sentence through line 22 to the
period.
Check that motion first for that
amendment, anything with any
objection to adoption of that
amendment just on the on the
Amendment ceremony. Just think
Senator Stewart Zepce allies.
This bill is going to go over
behind the curtain over at the
basement of LFC Just take the
number 54 of the light of day
again after it leaves here. I
think the policy decisions we
want to buy this.
And then find him. Thank you,
Senator Bucket.
Yes, sir. I will accept the
amendment.
Everybody to anyone else.
Is there any objection? The
adoption adamant.
That amendment objecting,
although there's in support,
Okay. Back to you, senator Doing
part two.
And so, Mr Chair. Um I would
propose
Amendment Now Page one line 21
after the word, Clayton
I'm trying to think of how to
had said before, provided that
the language that I'm seeing as
used as more contingent on
So, um, I guess contingent on
The facility, not help would be
inserted after the word Clayton
Online 21.
Contingent on the facility, not
housing, immigration detainees.
If there's a
Uh, a better way to phrase that
I am. I am really discussion on
that proposal.
It into the political
National political asylum
seekers and things like that
coming here illegally in the
committed crime detained for Mr
Chair. I and I don't know the
answer to this If someone is
They are an asylum seeker. Let's
say, but they're also being
detained.
For suspicion of committing a
crime.
Then aren't there not just an
immigration detainee they would
be
Also a criminal detainee.
I don't know The answer to that.
Uh, I don't know if you do.
Um, but I I but I understand
your point, Senator, Um and I
think now
Uh um.
How about this? Um
I'll modify my motion.
Ah!
Line 21 after the word Clayton
contingent on the facility, not
contracting with the with ice
immigration, customs.
Unfortunately, that is my
My my my new modified motion.
Or actually, sorry. One more
time, Mr Chair. Um, sorry to me.
Be sorry. I think she's running
out of the racist.
Because I think it's um, not
entering into an
intergovernmental services
agreement with ice because
because then if they wanted to
contract they still couldn't go
through the procurement process.
Um, and there's because there's
been cases that say you can
limit
Entering into those I G s a is
Uh,
Because then they can still go
through the procurement process
if they choose, But at least
this would
They would not get it just
automatically use this facility
As I understand they have
already committed not to.
Um so I'm just looking to hold
the states that their commitment
So, yes, but, um, on line 21
after the word, Clayton.
Insert comma contingent on the
facility.
Not entering into and
intergovernmental services
agreement with immigration and
customs enforcement.
It's the motion worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair. I think
when you visit with the
secretary
Obviously, we need to get
confirmation that this is what
they're already doing. And I
would say that because the
senator is a member of that
committee, and it's going to be
putting together and wrapping
this all up.
Ah!
Anyone sitting here who I
Trust in his word. He's going to
have that conversation with her
and shouldn't be a problem
because I again my understanding
is that is the deal, but I
haven't It's been this was when
we had a couple of bills a
couple of years ago, trying to
close all of all of the
facilities to do exactly this,
which is I know you're working
on that as well. So again, I do
think there's a way it's
language in the budget.
Ah, certainly because we have a
member of the Senate finance
sitting here at the table. He's
the one who can certainly work
on that. And we do get a chance
to look at that one again. I
think it's a It makes sense to
put that in because I do think
it's consistent. Obviously, the
secretary is moving in different
directions. Then there's a
challenge, and I'm sure we'll
have that discussion.
Hip and back. That's what she's
doing, but I don't think that's
when we don't want the state to
get into that business, So I
support them. Mr Chairman. If
it's a these are the committee
for me to put that in language.
In the budget.
I can certainly do that.
It's not a problem.
Um
That is directing the
Corrections Department.
Before they buy the facility to
tell
The secretary of corrections
that you cannot do certain
things with that particular
facility.
That doesn't director for
office. Illit ease this
facility.
And
I don't have a problem with
that.
So if you want to put that in
there, I would accept that
amendment.
And if you want me to get it in
the budget, I will get that. I
was just gonna say that I
thought her original language
was adequate, but we're on the
proposed amendment.
Everyone clear on it without
having to read. Read it.
Is there objection to the
adoption of that amendment.
Show center, Morris all others
and support that amendment is
adopted doing
Do you still have the floor? I
don't have anything else, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Risotto.
That Mr Chairman, nobody else
We're ready for a motion on the
bill. Already. Very good. I
would move the do not pass on
Senator 167 and a do pass on the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute on Centerville. One
incorporated motions or any
objection to that motion.
So all in support of woods, you
have to pass. Thank you, Mr
Mayor. I'm sorry. I'm going to
stay here for just a minute for
the next bill, If you don't
mind, uh appreciate next time
I'll try to bring you half a
paragraph. Are you presenting
the Meat Inspection Act for
Senator Stefanik stores where
we're doing it together.
Wonderful. We're now on Senate
Bill 37.
Katie teacher for a couple of
minutes.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee. I believe you
have a committee substitute that
your committee came up with a
0.3.
Well, the 23 page, Uh, original
Bill went down to two pages with
the 0.3 version.
So senators on this bill
37. We've got
Everybody may recall we were sub
established committee procedures
where we set aside a certain
amount of time for proponents
and opponents. I don't know that
on the proponents, is there
anyone who's asking to speak as
the organizer or on behalf of
all the proponents or just want
to hear from everyone of the
proponents? Thank you. We'll try
and get him out. There is, it
might be unclear center.
Um what I what I do in this
committee isn't that I don't
like the idea of having every
reconstructive
So I set aside amount of time
for proponents and if they can
organize themselves behind one
person who coordinates things we
avoid duplication and so on and
so forth, but that requires an
organized proponent.
Organizing this and I don't know
that we have that. So we have
246. We have six proponents and
if we're going to set aside 15
minutes for doing that,
everybody's gonna speak for two
minutes. You have you have that
option. Everybody can speak for
two minutes or you can have one
person. Speak for 15 minutes.
So, Mr Chair members of the
committee. If these people could
speak, they could even be one
minute.
Because they are all these
different organizations.
Very good. All right. We'll
allow the proponents and that
keep them to that commitment.
And then there's just one. Well,
there's one additional proponent
by zoom. There are no opponents
registered, so we won't hear any
of youse.
Go ahead, Senator. Um Madam
chair. Would you like me to go
over the sub or the original
bill? Um, I think you have to
adapt the sub for
Madam chair Do not pass the
Senate Bill 37 and for purposes
of discussion, Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute percent of
Bill 37. Senator, I'd say.
Go present on this, So thank you
very much. Madam Chair. The
original bill was 23 pages. The
committee sub That's redundant.
Two pages. It takes out quite a
bit of rulemaking from the
original.
And, um it also, uh, identifies
that the Livestock board will
work with the federal entity.
To meet the requirements of the
program.
And with me today I have one of
the 21 co sponsors.
Um, evenly divided between
Democrats and Republicans.
The original co sponsors are
Senators. Stephan IX, Munoz,
Senator Sanchez, Center, Woods
and representative Bill
Armstrong. With me is miss, Um
Linda Garland, the director of
the Mexico Livestock Bureau.
As we indicated. We're happy to
stand for questions and
comments. We have brought this
before.
Great. Thank you. Senators that
Do you want to go to proponents?
Yeah. Do you want any
introduction?
Sure.
Good afternoon. Senators. Thank
you for this opportunity to talk
about this bill. So the main
reason that we really want this
program to stand up is that it
provides a great amount of
economic growth for the state.
It also provides a lot of food
security for all residents of
the state if we can
But more processing plants into
production in this state that
comes about by providing more
inspectors to stand in the
plants to inspect for retail
sales. There's a lot of great
opportunity there out there for
not only, um
That
Provide meat into school. Senior
citizens, Um
Home grown meat and two family
homes and also just lots of
business growth out there for
the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair if you
don't want to spend time hearing
from everybody, you could just
You know, Senator, I think if if
you want we have Mr Lauren
Patterson for the New Mexico
Cattle Growers Association. Ms
Gillian Joyce, government
relations advocate for Rocky
Mountains. Farmers Union, Miss
Abby O'Connor, New Mexico Wool
Growers Association, Ms Kristin
Thompson, New Mexico Restaurant
Association, and Miss Tiffany
Rivera. New Mexico FARMING
livestock You
So if you want to waive public
comment, we can do that, or we
can have issues and economic
development activity for farmers
and ranchers. Ranchers
specifically, and it's very
important to their economy.
Alright, that sounds like waving
public comments.
Is that correct? Okay, um,
members of the committee.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Senators. Um, appreciate
the
The work we've been able to do
on this, and this is a little
bit longer than my bill. So
I think it's a good compromise.
I think mine was only one
paragraph, but I I think, um,
what this will do for
For our ranchers and farmers and
all across the state hopefully
meets what? What we hope it will
do.
Um and I think it it definitely
will create those opportunities
for them. I know just down in
Roswell. Um, just having the
ability to then get into the
school system is is there
And so, um, hopefully more.
What's your shops will sign up
for this? And hopefully,
Livestock board can can operate
this and get it going and keep
it running and running
efficiently. Um, And so I'm just
happy to be listed now as a
sponsor. Um and I think it's
just a testament to what the
Senate can do whenever we do
work together and finally get
this bill passed. I think this
has been six years in a row.
So 66 times a charm.
Thank you, Senator.
And the other members of the
committee.
Well, Senator Stewart
So, Hmm.
Member, Senator John Pinto, he
and I for several years kept
talking about this. Um he had
his own meat inspection or sure
was meat inspection, but he had
something that was trying to
take me from ranchers. Farmers
turn it into something so
I don't really understand how
this is going to work.
So from the state down, how's it
get started?
Because this is you know, I
support this is very short. But
it doesn't give me any idea of
how it's really going to work.
So, Madam Chair, Senator, I'm
going to have the director of
the Livestock Board explain are
related state relationship with
Mr. Chair, Um, Senator Stewart.
So this is a very complicated
program to stand up. Um, the
most important thing that you
need to know is that the F Sis
has preemption overall, state
and poultry inspection across
the United States. So in order
for the state to have an in
state inspection program, we
have to meet their requirements
of at least equal to
So if we come back later or it's
our board decides that some
things need to be stronger. We
have the opportunity to do that.
But we cannot be less than we
must be equal to
So this bill that we've been
presented with gives us the
opportunity to meet that minimum
requirement. And then once we
meet the requirement we enter
into a cooperative agreement
with F s. I s and then we can
take over. What is it s I s
works under U S. D. A. They are
the Food Safety inspection
service.
Cross the United States.
So what this really does it
gives the state the opportunity
not to be reliant on the federal
government.
You as lawmakers can actually
control how many inspectors
stand out there and processing
plants, providing more retail
sales of meat to the residents
of the state.
And I hope that if I need to
clarify, please
Well, Mr Chairman, I mean, I am
so not knowledgeable about this.
So you started with ground zero,
so I feel a little better with
your explanation.
Um, I am a little concerned
about horses. How they fit into
this with this. Allow
A company to sell horse meat.
Madam chair. I'm going to defer
to the director of the Livestock
Bureau, but Senator would would
like to come in on that It's
against the law to slaughter
horses for human consumption.
In the United States.
If that's what you're referring
to for human consumption.
So, um, that's federal law,
right?
So is it your is it your opinion
that you don't need to say
anything about that in this
building?
That's my opinion.
We the the only horse slaughter
that's happening, as in Canada
and Mexico in our North America.
We're not advocating.
It's it's not acceptable
practice and state in Mexico.
Uh and and that That's where
I'll leave it.
So, Mr Chairman, So it's the
It's the New Mexico Livestock
Board so that would have the
they have the rule making
authority. There are the ones
that could allow something
something
Madam chairman. I'm sorry. I'm
leaving you out of this
conversation. She's listening.
Uh, madam Fru, Tim.
I know there's concern that that
a lot of advocates have
That a private businessman is
going to do something.
And it's not. It's
It's not that the livestock
board
They also checked for animal
disease. They check for cleaning
this. They checked for
Uh, and in a
Slaughter operation. They grade
meat, they do many things.
But two things.
There's not a market for horse
meat. There's not a desire to
slaughter horses, and it's
illegal and it's illegal.
I don't know what else I can
tell you. That's good.
Appreciate it.
Okay, well, I'll relinquish the
floor for now, Mr Any other
members of the committee
So, um, Madam Chair this bill,
if, uh, past will allow the New
Mexico Livestock Board.
To receive federal matching
dollars from the federal
government.
From the department mentioned to
match with our state, we would
have to comply with their
requirements in order to receive
their federal dollars and that
would prohibit
At the slaughter of horse meat
Slaughter of horses, Senator I
respect my constituents where I
represent
Um
Oh, madam share and, uh
Editors, uh and director
I just wanted to see if this
this language would would work
for you.
Uh, so so let me start with a
question.
And that is to deem this would
be on page two.
Um and and I would suggest we
make it. Ah.
Um
I knew we would I would put it
between once four and five.
New paragraph two and then re
number
Uh, it will be deemed horsemeat.
Slaughtered for human
consumption as adulterated
I'm sorry. Could you repeat that
Senator Deem
Horse meat.
Slaughtered.
For human consumption.
As adult.
Uh, we are ready to accept that.
And I and I and I saw Senator
Woods also
Guarding as well. Yes. Okay.
Very good. So, madam chair that
would be on page two between
lines four and five.
New paragraph two and then re
number
Deem.
Horse meat.
Slaughtered.
For human consumption as
adulterated.
Semicolon.
That's a friendly amendment. Any
discussion on that amendment?
Right? Yeah, he said that.
Stewart. So this this seems good
and succinct but adulterated.
I mean,
Is there? I don't quite
understand why you're using that
word, and is it specific to meet
and slaughtering?
Yes, it is. It has a particular
term of art, and I would
actually yield to Senator Woods,
who has a better understanding
of this than I do.
Thank you, Senator. Risotto.
Thank you, madam Chair.
It is a term used in the meat.
In the food processing industry
is
Things that are dis allowable.
That you can check for, and it's
this allowable to have in the
product.
And and Senator, We have a Food
safety act that specifically
addresses adulterated, uh, food
products. And so I think it
would end up going under that.
All right. Thank you.
Learn something new every day.
Any other members of the
committee on the Amendment.
Any objection to adopting that
amendment.
Seen on that's adopted any
other.
Anyone else on the bill?
No, senator back, are you
Um, I just moved to do pass.
I think Senator Stewart No wanna
substitute right?
Do not pass the Senate bill
through Thank you do pass the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Centerville, 37
to incorporate the amendment
Appoint for version.
I yield to the pro Thames
motion, right? Yeah. Okay.
Alright. That's the motion any
objection to that motion.
Seen none. You have to do pass.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
members of the committee. Thank
you Senators.
Four.
All right.
Madam Chair? Yes.
Sorry, but that's
it's clear the room, please. And
let's get to work. Um, the we've
got two items remaining, Gonna
work hard with the device chair
They're doing to get us done
with a hard stop at seven. That
should be more than adequate
time. I just want to let
committee members to know the
targets. You can make plans
accordingly. You don't believe
me anymore. But I'm just trying
to tell you my goals.
Sometimes I get it sometimes I
don't know, dude.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh, Senator
Guy goes, Go ahead.
Hair care.
Uh, committee appreciate the
opportunity to be here today. We
have before you sent Bill 61,
And it actually has a committee
sub before you today and I don't
know if you would like us
explain the committee sub and
move it.
Senator Stewart, You want to
make your motion?
What else? Hessler is, too. I
moved do not simple 61 and for
purposes of discussion do pass
on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substituted Bill 61.
Alright, so, yes. Go ahead and
present the committee sub
Senator Mr Chairman inter
centers we had had a hearing on
Senate Bill 61 and
In the process after we got
through that committee, we
talked to the State Highway
Department BOT and they were
wanting to add on their concerns
into this bill, and we actually
have them here today to walk
through their needs. Uh,
This gives us an opportunity to
have some, um
Currently right now in D F a
talks about all the jobs that we
have in the state that aren't
moving.
In a lot of that is due to the
capital. $4 million for
construction. I was trying to
move that because that helps
every municipality uh, schools
and counties in the state to to
get some of the projects going.
What happened? Let me refer back
when Covid hit or cost increased
for Matic Lee on materials.
So we tried to figure out how do
we get this done in a way that
we can correct some that open
job market back up for jobs in
the state?
And also help this self correct
last. Uh so we don't have to
come back in a couple of years
to changes in 19 and 20. I
changed it from 1 million to 4
million.
Now we're looking trying to get
to 10 Million for other jobs Got
state highway They're different
for right now, but we're trying
to see what we do to open the
procurement side of it. So that
way we can actually get back to
work. For instance, in Eunice
when we originally looked at a
job gymnasium is 350 ft dollars
per square foot. It is $1000
Square Foot currently
So there has to be a mechanism
that we can get back from New
Mexico to get back to work so we
can take some of the money is we
already have allocated and
people move them out. Uh, if you
don't mind, I'd like to
introduce my experts stand
around and have him say a few
words. And then we'll go to
John, have him explain to you on
that.
Thank you, madam. Sure. Yeah,
um, stand around and and I would
direct your attention to page
two of the bill on your
committee substitute and what
we're talking about our
thresholds.
For procurement. Uh, sorry.
architectural engineering
services and then for the
contract blowing part B for the
actual construction costs.
There's two parts to talk about,
Then I'll defer to highways on
their limitations and what had
quite simply put. These are
multiple contract.
That you get through a single
RFP and you can apply with that
over the years for procurement.
And we had, as a senator said We
had moved the threshold up in
both of these cases.
But circumstances of
substantially outrun us so that
the basis of this is for us to
set a base that is current in
this year 2023 and rather than
come back every year every other
year because of the events that
occur, But an indexing scheme in
That is conservative that would
automatically adjust the numbers
that are in in your in your
statutes. And so you see them on
party. This is for architectural
engineering services contracts.
And I would have a $15 million
limit for a for three years of a
project but no individual
project.
Could exceed $2 million. So you
have to a to an architecture
engineering firm, But then you
have a single
Uh, limitation for a particular
contract and in contracting
terms as far as schools, which
is where my expertise is. These
are fairly low limits. And don't
take on your large contracts.
Rather, things likely fall under
this part B.
This then is for the actual
construction costs. So there
there's engineering and
architectural precedes and goes
in during this, and then there's
the actual construction costs
and its limits are moved to $30
million over three year period
and or or and any single
contract may not extend to be on
10.
Million dollars and so that sets
those limitations up from where
they are. And you can see the
strike throughs on what we have
brought before.
And sets it in 2023 standards
You're in year end of 23 and
then later on as you move
through back to page
Five.
Yes. Whether we could then have
the indexing that is in is in
place using what's called
approved the produce of the
produce.
Pp. I excuse me.
Into the product. Price index.
There we go. Excuse me, pp. I is
not CPI CPI is much more
dynamic.
Pp. I really gets to the essence
of what these projects are
around because over the P p I
indexing. It has architectural
engineering.
And it has the prices for
product.
And that's exactly what we're
trying to square into this
So as you go through time, this
base would then be generated and
we have given you a example.
Sheet on CP that would show how
And this is all. Um
Just generated. For example,
there was show how it would
index over time.
And, uh and we're happy to cover
that as you have questions, but
the hypothetical calculation is
that table that's in the very
middle part of the most
explanatory of what
Pp. I process would do to adjust
the objects.
And Madam chair. I think I'll
stop there. I'm happy to answer
any questions you have might
have again. We're trying to not
come back.
Over and over and over and
legislation that's not good. We
don't think that's good policy
or practice. It's better to
build something in. You can
always come back. Should this
fail somehow.
And then do additional
legislation that would change
Amanda or whatever that's always
your prerogative.
This would allow us not to have
to do that.
Probably every other year or so
is what we're seeing the trend
line, so I'll end there and and
Senator, We may want to go to
highways, Madam Chair also so
the meat, potatoes and sin and
Judiciary Committee sub
Is for the Department of
Transportation all yield to John
Romero with the department to be
able to explain their needs and
how this will help them.
Good afternoon, Madam chair.
Thank you for your time. My name
is John Romero. I am with the N
M. D. O T.
So the language we're looking to
add, is to add separate
thresholds for N m d O T.
Um, those thresholds are 50
million per purchase Order and
$50 million per year.
Per contract.
The reason for that is the sheer
scale of BOT projects.
Um what we use indefinite
quantity. Um, procurement for we
call them price agreements. And
though the majority of those
contracts are utilized for our
maintenance program, whether
it's maintenance, subscribing
signing and the most important
one pavement preservation
Our pavement Preservation is an
important part of how we try to
maintain the condition of our
assets. Um, through proper
previous preservation. We can
have, uh, highway that is
supposed to have a 20 year
lifespan. If we
Preservative. The correct times
It can last up to 40 years,
potentially
Um, So, uh, the way we consider
this is so for our major
construction projects. We do
those with the conventional
design bid build. Those are for
a major construction projects of
a hara, The upcoming Montgomery
Comanche, those type of projects
those scale of projects cost us
Around $5.7 million per lane
miles for a regular repaving
project of a stretch of, say,
Interstate.
Our pavement preservation
projects, on the other hand, are
closer to $100,000 per lien
Mile. So what that means is the
type of work that we're doing,
which is maintenance.
Is roughly 2%. It's 2% of the
cost of what it does what it is
for major construction project.
So the way I assimilate that is
for vertical construction. If
you have a $10 million building
If you need to do a $200,000
really roofing.
As a maintenance project and you
don't want to have to continue
Go out to this to design bid
build, but you want to use the
convenience of a price
agreement. That's how this is
serving us. It's that level of
reconstruction or or
preservation. The other thing I
wanted to add is
I apologize. I lost my train of
thought. Hmm.
I guess that's it for now. If I
can think of it, I will ask
Senator Gallegos to turn it back
over to me or Cherif. You can,
um dang it, But Yeah, so that's
really what we're looking to do.
Oh, yes. So if the other thing
that's important about these
price agreements I apologize is
We have to be very flexible with
our payment preservation.
For instance, Um, I'm sure a lot
of you guys drove into Santa Fe
last legislative session on I 25
and notice the condition of that
road.
Over a winter, a road can go
from okay to completely bad, so
we have to be very agile and our
ability to provide that.
That, um, maintenance that needs
to keep it running for the time
being, if we were to have to go
out to a design bid build that
could take up to two years to
accomplish and
It would. Um, By the time we
would have been able to maintain
that segment of 25.
It would have been an even worse
condition than what it is so
that example we were able to in
this past construction season
provide a service and overly,
that's going to help extend the
life until we can get a major
construction project underway on
that project. So this price
agreements are extremely
important for us having
reasonable limits on those
Is extremely important for us to
be able to keep
Uh, the traveling public safe
and to keep our assets in as
good condition as possible.
Madam Chairman, Senator. So when
you do an overlay, and you're
trying to keep the roadway
usable if you've got a 20 year
life on the original road, this
lad between five and seven years
of life to that road and could
go further, with few more touch
ups do road work, but I don't do
state highway so we do in cities
and counties in League County,
but it's really important that
we
Protect our infrastructure. This
does that, In the other thing I
wanted to say, man Cherries that
we have Clinton Turner here that
came up with this sheet.
And he's here is in the common
economists. He's actually
financial policy analyst for the
capital, But he would be able to
explain. We had a, uh, senator
neighbor asked a question the
other day and committee and we
had to go to him for the answer.
So being that senator, neighbor
dozen attorney we thought with a
room full of attorneys probably
better have him here now with
us, But we stand for questions
and
Um I love to be able to explain
it to you. And with my experts
in great, Thank you, Senator. I
don't think we have anyone
signed up as a proponent or
opponent of the spill, so we'll
go to members of the committee.
I have a question. No one else
does.
So I'm trying to find it right
now. I think it was last year.
We had a bill in this committee.
That for this got rid of a bunch
of procurement code stuff or
really increased it for D O T.
I remember wanting to put a
sunset on it.
And then we went on and on and
on, and everyone got tired and
we kind of ended up abandoning
that, and I want to say it was
Senator Shen does Bill but
torment, okay?
So how did we haven't especially
for D O t haven't haven't We
don't kind of done this already
and that Bill
And sort of
Madam Chair? Yes, During that
bill, we did the D O t f I r.
That was part of that bill
suggested that these caps that
are presented in this amendment.
Um, be attitude. But what did we
do in that bill? Because I
remember
Frankly, being kind of
uncomfortable with it, Um and
and and it looks like we have
someone who knows. So if you
want to
If you can tell us who you are,
remembers Rick Pity, executive
director for department
transportation. It was Senator
Tollman that that proposed that
builds a sponsor that building
this committee. He dropped it.
So we didn't move it forward.
But in that bill, like Mr Romero
said that it basically what
we're trying to propose in the
amendment was in that bill.
And Mr Chair. This was a
different bill because this is
one that passed the one that I'm
thinking of past and
Okay, I might be was taken, but
that's the only one I remember.
Yeah, because I remember Senator
Shindo.
Calling me sunset on the floor
and saying You're not going to
make hay sunset. You're not
going to bring that up on the
floor, right? Ah, man, so
But I'm sure not trying to
confuse. But I had one last
year. The move to the caps up to
20 million so and a silver.
That's not here, uh, was having
a hard time with the 20 million
So that's why I came back this
year with 10 million, But that
Bill did not pass either. So I'm
not sure one that had passed Mr
Chair. This is something we
passed, Um
And I feel like
I want to know what we passed
there to assess this, But my my
other question is
I understand that construction
costs have gone are very high
right now.
Changing these amounts, I think
kind of assumes that they are
going to stay this high
indefinitely. Going forward. Um
which I don't know if that is
that might be a reasonable
assumption, but I don't know.
I
But I have a I'm concerned about
changing caps under the
procurement code based on what
could be a temporary situations.
Monetary. Um that's a good thing
about what we're trying to do is
tied to pp I because if
something were to change in the
material cost drop
Then off this chart here.
You know, automatically go down.
Uh, if you're mitt cost went up
again, I wouldn't have to come
before you in two years. It will
actually self regulate itself to
the market. So 11% of the driver
in this last year, going back to
Eunice from $352,000 Square
Foot, 11% was construction,
actual hands on construction
costs.
The remainder.
This product.
So the red iron the material you
need to construct the facility.
That is what went up in their
life and in ours When we're
doing asphalt, it's governed by
oil cost.
And so anytime oil spikes, it
hits him severely. Uh, the
asphalt is is gravel a little
bit of
Other materials, but a large
percentage of his brothers oil.
It's a heavier oil and you have
in the car, but it's no base, so
it's market driven, and what we
want to do is let the market
decide.
Not myself, so it would cycle up
or down.
Depending on the market, so we
wouldn't have to come see you on
a regular basis. Madam chairman
if I could, That's That's why an
indexing is there were setting
the the 2023 marker.
And that is that pp. I goes up
or down, it will adjust
accordingly against this base.
So forward to follow a draw the
base down the rivers to rise.
It'll move the base up.
That's not as volatile as C P. I
is.
We wanted something that was
more tied to the specifics were
trying to guard against
And also something by the way is
more conservative in its curve.
The architecture is is a very
slight, slight slow.
Product part is what has the
high variation so this should
adjust for that.
And and hold it out there now,
Madam Chair As you know the
problem with the Legislature, we
do this for several years and
you feel like it hasn't adjusted
itself. Yours are the product
would come back and fix the
indexes or what were you might
find the flaw. We're trying not
to have to come back to you and
deal with market variation.
As it goes through time. I don't
know what the future holds as a
as a school superintendent. I
always hoped for low steel costs
and low low sheetrock costs and
things like that didn't always
get that. But
You're trying to get inside your
bonding ability and things like
that. Right now we're running
well ahead of
As a senator said We have some
school facilities be the rural
that are as high as $1100, a
square foot.
Our old marker just to put in
perspective was about $380, a
square foot and so that kind of
push when 89% of it is the
product that we think using that
as an indicator for for the
valuation is the right way to do
it. And I I I appreciate that,
Um
Mr J. I guess I still kind of
worried that that we're taking
the really high numbers and
those are the ones that will be
modified. It seems like it will
always kind of result of that.
Try and find this bill because I
feel like
I feel like this would be in
addition to what we have passed
already, and I want to
understand what the total impact
of that would be specifically
for the D O T stuff.
Madam chair. Can I give you just
a little bit more calming? So,
uh,
General Services Department will
be watching this all the time
anyway. That's their job. So if
they're spike in one way or the
other, I'm sure and a silver
will step on me and make sure
that I pay attention because
they and Senator I I don't I
don't like passing legislation
on the hope and prayer that
Whoever happens to be in certain
position in the future will be
Geant as we hope they will be
there job in and we've discussed
with this with him. This is
actually the first time we've
tied to an index and and we felt
that that was going to be
something that's going to be
long term. It's got to be
proven. We've got to have it in
so we can see it work, but we
feel comfortable.
That it will make the ups and
downs as market drives it Thank
you, senator. Other members of
the committee.
Mr Chairman.
Senator, I've always
Perhaps.
Expose my age.
Um, by my position on some of
these procurement changes, I
practiced architecture for went
back to 1985.
When at that period of time,
most contracts were very
competitively bid Mr Rounds and
you all may remember that.
As an architect. You prepare a
good set of plans. You
competitively, bid him and have
big day You'd open them up and
the contract will be awarded.
We've we've gotten away from
that over the years to more
creative ways of awarding these
services much less risk to
contractors and architects by
blowing budgets by doing all
that at the same time, I worry
that when we do that we
eliminate an advantage to the
taxpayer. With that competition,
competitive bidding prices,
prices number one. The other
concern always have is that we
price out
Um people who want to get
started in the business. A small
business owners who get a chance
to compete when you have
I'm more competitive marketplace
when we When we increase these
camps were going to take in the
case here we're gonna take on
Page two subsection B contractor
can go up to $30 million
Without having to go through a
procurement process over three
years and, um in any one project
can be up to $10 million.
So what ends up happening often
times as you get up with a very
small group of
Of contractors, architects or
engineers who end up with these
relationships and makes it
harder for somebody to break in.
Um So there in lies, my my
question, and I don't know
ultimately.
Whether I'll be persuaded to
vote for this bill, or whether
the numbers will move me as we
debate and discuss the numbers,
but they're pretty generous, you
know, essentially saying, you
don't have to go through a
procurement process to receive
up to $30 million of work over a
three year period of time.
That's a problem. That's a big
contractor. Um and that's my
concern. The other concern I
have is the
CP. I idea.
I might be receptive to even
striking.
The CPP language from the
preceding committee, the Health
and Public Affairs Committee.
I understand that
That goal once again in the name
of official C
But we've expressed some
concerns about that, with
salaries and other things, too,
because we're taking ourselves
out of the process, has
legislators.
We're and we're effectively
delegating that to to
I want to say an artificial
index. It's really not
artificial. It has some basis in
meaning, but it may not have a
very close direction or meaning
to construction costs just to
take a C P. I and say that
that's going to be quite Mr
Rounds. You know this in Las
Cruces, the cost of construction
were fired. They went through
the roof at various times far
had a far higher rate than
CP I index would indicate
So while I appreciate you all
want to have efficiencies when
not having to come back here
every few years or so. I think
Senator doings right? And I
think my recollections, right
we've been. We've been doing
this for the last several years,
increasing increasing,
increasing these numbers without
any difficulty. Frankly, don't
know we've ever turned anybody
away.
So I don't so I don't know that
that having US review and
approve that is really such a
big obstacle.
And I'm always a little hesitant
to
Putting CP I numbers into
statute essentially saying,
we'll let them we'll let that
index determined.
What? What? What we're gonna do
for governance or or limits.
So
Oh, wait to hear from other
committee members, but I sure
would like to get a thoughts on
that that CP specifically and
then some of these other numbers
high end the architectural you
know if I look at the
architectural engineering
Provision and subsection a
This would authorize up to $15
million in architectural
engineering services again over
four years.
Um, that's in the architectural
where that's pretty. That's
pretty healthy contract. That's
those those you know everything.
Architects earning eight or 10%
fee on the project.
That means that $15 million
you're talking about? Maybe 10
times that right? So you're
talking about
50 million in construction
costs. Mr Chairman, May I do
respond to that? I want to be
sure Be clear. The $15 million
is from multiple contracts to
visit total amount in
architecture engineering from to
draw from a multitude contracts
would tie itself to this
multiple procurement.
The project for Project Is it $2
million, and she beat about a
$20 million contract or so.
In rough math and today's I'll
just give an example in today's
schools. Elementary schools
between so are view is that this
may be modification more likely
to be those that fall into this,
Although Mr Chairman, you know
you can do playgrounds and other
kinds of things that are are
enhancements on site.
Wings that you build with would
likely fall under them. The
intent is to deal with these
smaller
We're not building whole schools
and whole facilities. With these
numbers from this is an
aggregate of multiple contracts,
So I'm understanding everything
you're saying and I appreciate
the explanation. I'm
Probably inclined to support the
numbers simply, frankly, because
there's nobody here in
opposition to the bill. I mean,
I would presume that there were
small contractors who felt like
they were being priced out of
the market by avoiding these
procurement procedures. I
presume they be here and say,
Hey, I can't. I can't get into
the market because it's been
captured by the big by the big
dogs, and they're squeezing.
It's out, and I don't hear that.
That's been my concern over the
years. I feel like I'm I'm here
trying to protect the little
guy, but little guys not here,
and he doesn't seem to be
interested in where she doesn't
seem to be interested,
protecting herself. So I wonder
how protective I have to be
really for for them. So, um oh,
Hear from others, but but that's
that's my thought. Process On
this, and again, I think the
number is probably going to be
okay for me only because of
that because I don't hear
opposition.
Thank you, madam.
Senator.
Worth, Consider, Morris So thank
you, Madam Chair. I would know
that I have
There's no one here in
opposition, but I have heard
from New Mexico A that they're
concerned about this bill for
exactly smaller and medium sized
firms.
So again, In fairness, they're
not here. I get that, but I
think you're raised issues that
they would raise. Um
And again, that's that's the
That's the balance. We've gotta
strike here. I get that.
Remorse. Thank you, madam. Dry,
shared that majority leader
often when people aren't here,
it's because here come and work
even though they're not here is
because they're probably there
are members of the committee.
Senator Stewart
Thank you, madam Chair is is
probably a dumb question.
So how do how does prevailing
wage way into this?
Not at all or it's so deeply
embedded. We can't even see it
or
So, Mr Chairman, Senator
Prevailing wages is part of the
construction cost always
All construction projects for
Governmentally funded projects
have the and all of those, and
so it goes where it goes Center,
so it's built in.
Sort of build chairman. It's
built in as part of the other
members of the committee. This
is completely off the subject,
but that's sort of true unless
you're very creative right in
some parts of our economy. Folks
are creatively finding ways to
avoid the prevailing wage by
essentially going to private
developers, right having the
private developer developed the
project, build a project and
then having the state by the
project from the private
developer
And that that's how you
creatively avoid prevailing
wage. Uh, it's from. It's very
interesting what I do for a
living As a lawyer, we we passed
laws up here and then people
hire lawyers to figure out how
to avoid the laws and and very
sophisticated, good business.
People are very good at doing
those kind of things. But, you
know, the good example is I
don't mean to step out of
tricks. I don't know that I'm
well enough educated, but the
Um
University of New Mexico State
was looking at
I'm buying on a private
apartment complex that was
recently developed in Las
Cruces, as opposed to building
student housing, right If you
build a student housing, you've
gotta pay prevailing wage. You
got to go through the
procurement process and so
forth. It's much easier just to
have a private developer
building apartment complex and
then have the university by the
apartment complex with with
something enormous savings,
right. The prevailing wages an
enormous component.
To a public project. So it's you
again too. That was really to
your point. Madam Pro TEM.
It is built in unless you're
pretty creative Government
entity, and some of them were
pretty creative about it.
Members are Senator store, I
think
Other members of the committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
Former senator Every Soto.
Madam Chair, I move. We thank
the sponsors that move on to the
next. Um I'm not sure.
technically, what kind of
emotion that is Senator
Ah, you wanna You wanna You
wanna try again? Yeah. Okay,
Madam Chair. Um
I appreciate that. I had a very
interesting conversation this
last weekend with a
Friend, professional friend who
who travels around the state
observes legislatures, and her
observation was kind of
interesting. There's one really
interesting thing I've observed
about. You knew Mexico
legislators, which is you seem
very internal intent on not
hurting each other's feelings,
she said. That seems to be the
primary motivation of you guys
in New Mexico's That's not hurt
when another's feelings.
Um, Senator, have you So do you
know your motion seems to be
let's there's doesn't seem to be
a wish of the committee to take
some action on this at the time.
I'll make a direct motion to
table it's become a way of
hurting people's feelings by
tabling matters, but it simply
means that we're not going to
act in the future. I think
that's probably the procedural
way to do it as opposed to your
version, which is, Let's not
hurt anybody's feelings. Let's
uh, let's let's go into the next
item. I think that's what you're
doing Separate risotto before we
do that. Can we ask Senator
Gallegos?
How that makes him feel.
Yeah.
Miss Karen Senator, would you
like to see the tear?
Alright, We have met him Church,
and I know it's not debatable
motion, but again, I'm always
reminded. We're hearing a 30 Day
session. This is a an important
topic. I know it's important to
the industry into what you all
are trying to do. It seems to me
this is something that we might
want to think a little bit more
about me. Be not
Pressing in the 30 Day session
here, so that's that's the
reason for my emotion.
Alright, We have emotions table.
Is there any opposition to that
motion?
No, Senator Stewart.
And
And Senator Moore is supposed
not to hurt her feelings.
Yeah. All right. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you.
All right, Senator, you will be
held to very strict time limits.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair Senate Bill 69 is the bill
that you all are familiar with
its well publicized in the
press. We've talked a great deal
about it. This would require a
14 day waiting period.
In connection with the purchase
of a firearm. There is a good
data that relates a waiting
period to potential to save
lives, particularly in the areas
of
Individuals with suicidal Fahd's
Or in cases of domestic
violence. Cooling off period
makes some sense.
The bill I originally introduced
last year.
Took it to 14 days. I did so at
the time because Hawaii had a 14
day waiting period and it had
not been successfully struck or
challenged in court. So that
seemed like a good model, which
we could establish a date. I
don't I don't want the
committee. I think it's
completely arbitrary. That's
where that that date comes from
in the preceding committee. We
Adopted one amendment, which
would take it to 14.
Calendar days as support as
opposed to 14 business days
because those of us that are
lawyers know there's a whole
rule of civil procedure rules,
Six that tries to define what is
a business day and what does it
Calendar day and how you compute
holidays and
Etcetera, etcetera. So rather
than get into some confusion
about how we're going to compute
and calculate days, we just
change that to purely calendar
days where there's a Senator
Ivey Soto, he may have an
improvement, specified calendar
days that it's implied or by
rule. It's interpreted to be
days, but that's the only
proceeding amendment, Madam
Cheryl, Stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, I don't
believe we have anyone signed up
in support. We have one person
signed up.
Uh, in opposition, and that is
Nate Esky who is on zoom, Mr
Esky. You can
Go ahead and and folks the
procedures of Mr Chair behind
you. There's some folks waving,
but we don't have anyone who has
signed up.
Under the procedures.
Thank you, madam. Chair members
of the Committee, uh, did ask
you on behalf of over 1700
members of zero Rifle and Pistol
Club here in Albuquerque Area
Center. Cervantes wants to pass
this bill in the back of
feelings. He feels the burn test
is unworkable, And he feels the
opinion so flawed. It won't
survive the next six months and
that Rahimi will fatally
undermine it moving any
challenge this bill, he said as
much in the previous committee.
I personally disagree with that
prognostication. Ultimately, his
feelings and mine aren't
relevant. What's relevant is the
Bruin is current and controlling
jurisprudence on the subject.
And if SB 69 is analyzed under
brunette can't survive.
To briefly recap when the second
men's plain text covers an
individual's conduct
constitution. Presumptively
protects that conduct. The
government must then justify its
regulation by demonstrating its
consistency with the nation's
tradition of historic firearm
regulation.
Right to keep arms necessarily
implies the right to acquire
them. Has the right to publish
implies the right to acquire
instruments in publication,
Presumptively protected conduct
build, regulate that conduct.
Therefore, Senator Cervantes has
to be able to take that second
step.
And remember historical
developments closest to the
founding area or reconstruction
of the most important, those are
the late 19th century, much less
so those are the 20th not at
all.
The standards absolutely fatal
to SB 69. There were no waiting
period on firearms or any other
arms anywhere in the United
States. Before 1900, the first
waiting period law was enacted
in California in 1923.
Minority of other states enacted
the handgun waiting period. Laws
in the 19 twenties and thirties
too few to establish a broad
tradition and far too late in
any case.
We heard in the interim about
the futility of tilting
legislation at the windmill of
Brewin Court is the court.
Why, then Father's bill.
Thank you. Wonderful. Good. Any
time left. I'd like to yield it
to anyone else Who'd speak in
opposition. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr SK. And you all did send
in an email of organized
opposition.
So so, Yes, I
Mr and so altogether for the
organized opposition. You all
have 15 minutes about two
minutes. I've been used Bill.
Fire, son. I'm sorry. Sure. I'm
mispronouncing that
Um, Madam Chair. Don't worry
about the pronunciation.
Can you hear me now? Yes.
Excellent. Don't worry about the
pronunciation of my name. I'm
used to it.
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee. Uh, Senator
Cervantes. I'm Dr William Fire.
Eisen. I'm a retired computer
scientist here in Santa Fe.
As such, I'm interested in
legislation based upon real data
and experience a stand to oppose
this bill, the longest waiting
period in the nation. There is
no data that documents lives
saved by a band as long as 14
days as representative Romero
mitts in her house companion
Bill, she had a gut feeling
about this, but no
justification.
In fact, there is data points in
the other direction. It actually
shows increased deaths for
waiting periods longer than
seven days. These are the
victims of domestic violence or
unable to defend themselves
because they are denied timely
access to a firearm.
All lives are worth saving, but
a 14 day period is arbitrary and
experience shows it to be
dangerous.
And by the way, thank you,
senator 73 exception for CCW
holders.
I know that that is a gratuitous
thing for me.
But thank you, Madam chair and
members of the committee
Senator. Sympathies, sir. Thank
you, Uh, Terra Mika, Um Madam
Chair Committee members, Tara
Mitchell with the National Rifle
Association. Thank you for
straightening that out about the
the sign in, Um Senate Bill 69.
We oppose because it won't
provide for more thorough or
expanded background checks.
It changes nothing about how FBI
investigates gun buyers. FBI
will not initiate another check
after the 14 days have elapsed
to search for any updated
information in the criminal in
the National Instant check
system. SP 69 applies to all
firearms sales, not just cases
where there is a delay.
Response from FBI for further
investigation. 90% of firearm
background checks result in an
immediate proceed response from
FBI, it makes no sense to impose
a waiting period on these
people. The argument that a
waiting period serves as a
cooling off period is illogical.
Nearly half of New Mexico
households have a firearm and
two thirds of new gun buyers.
Um, two thirds of buyers already
own a firearm, so cooling off
period won't impact them,
according to a T F firearm
tracing from crime scenes, the
average time between one of
firearms sold and using a crime
is 9.3 years, so cooling off
period is not going to prevent
criminal acts. Thank you. We
oppose Senate Bill 69.
Thank you, Daryn. Let's sort
Madam chair. Remember the
members of the Committee? I'm
Daryn la sort with the National
shooting Sports Foundation. We
are the Firearm Industry Trade
Association.
One of the practical costs of
this bill, we know will be
people in rural areas exercising
their constitutional rights we
have had industry members tell
us that some of their customers
have to travel up to 150 miles,
one way to access their shop
where they're mandated to go to
exercise their right to
Um, acquire firearms. And so
when you look at that, that's a
300 mile round trip just to buy
a gun today that because this
bill will turn into a 600 mile
round trip to simply exercise a
constitutional, right, um well,
this bill may not save lives we
do believe it may cost them as
some of the previous witnesses
have mentioned.
Um, there's one variable in this
entire mix that we can control.
We can't necessarily control
truly violent people finding
tools to commit their violence
We can control potential victims
being able to acquire tools to
protect themselves. Obviously,
members, you know people who are
domestic violence victims
stocking victims come readily to
mind.
Our members are the ones who
have to look across the counter
when a stalking victim comes to
their shop.
Asked for the means of
protection, and we have to tell
them no, we're sorry, but no
Because they didn't have the
foresight to think they may
become a victim and they may be
helpless. They're going to pay
that price of having to wait
helplessly for 14 days or longer
to be able to acquire their
constitutionally for themselves.
Thank you.
Okay?
And the last person signed up
for the organized opposition is
Zack Ford, who I believe is on
Zoom, Mr Fort. If you can hear
me, go ahead and proceed.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Zak for
it. I am the legislative affairs
officer from New Mexico Shooting
Sports Association. We
collectively represent thousands
of New Mexico. Gun owners,
stores ranges and concealed
carry instructors. We stand in
opposition to this bill.
Uh um, You know, in the brewing
decision that came out from the
Supreme Court there's just
outlined is the historic analog
tests were basically you people
to support the law. You have to
show historic examples of where
that law was used, and we have
numerous examples of laws where
that prevents someone from the
firearm because they are deemed
to be a dangerous individual.
We're going to see the Supreme
Court way and more on this in
the Rahimi case, however, the
bill before US today, Senate
Bill 69 would declare everyone
who is not a firearm owner but
who wishes to exercise their
right to become a fire motor to
be a dangerous individual for 14
days, Uh, review of as Nate
matched earlier review of
historic examples
Does not show where there is any
type of waiting period or
deeming someone who merely
wanted to exercise their right
to be a dangerous person because
they wish to exercise their
right. It creates a class of
people who are being
discriminated against under this
bill.
Personally, I actually did not
grow up around firearms the way
many people kind of assumed that
I did, and I actually did not
become a gun owner until there
was an incident a number of
years ago where I was personally
threatened.
A few days later, I went out and
purchased my first firearm. I'm
thankful that I didn't have to
wait the 14 days to receive that
fire when I was able to take it
home with me the day that I
purchased it and saw that
background shot completed. So
for all these reasons, we ask
that you post Senate Bill 69.
Thank you. Members of the
committee.
Oh, sorry, Senator Risotto.
Thank you very much, madam.
Sure. Um, and, uh, your
surroundings. I appreciate the
conversation we had about this
earlier.
Um, you know, I I'm just to the
fact that the
That the president protesters
start feeling well and and and
and to knowing where the votes
are in this committee
Uh, instead of going through
making a series of amendments, I
don't know that this is going to
survive. Bruin.
Um, but I recognized and, uh and
I recognize what the in terms of
Trying to do a balancing test,
which is specifically
Rejected under broad
But, um, but it is, but it is a
firearm regulation.
And so
I do think that the exceptions
that you that you have
Um are are appropriate. I do
think
I do think that if someone is
already
Purchased a firearm.
If we had a way of them.
Uh um.
That that that that is something
that
Perhaps should be taken into
into account.
Because, um, a waiting period
for something that already has a
firearm.
Uh, doesn't seem to
Accomplished the goal.
Either in terms of domestic
violence or in terms of suicide.
Because they already have fire.
But having said that, uh and uh
and in deference to
Uh, do pass. Thank you. Mhm.
Alright. Other members of the
committee
Senator brutal
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, I'm not an
attorney, so I'm not going to
pretend like I would even know
if it would survive Bruin. But
You know, being just a country
boy, This just doesn't
Doesn't pass common sense
really, to me.
And I understand, you know were
we always have these arguments,
Urban versus rural and and I
understand.
You know, there is a crime issue
and in Albuquerque whether
that's related to people that
are passing the background
checks instantly or not, um
You know, I haven't been shown
data either way to to really be
able to
To sway me that that that that's
an issue.
Um, but I will tell you this.
What this will do.
The people of Carlsbad, the
people of Artemisia, the people
of Roswell.
Well simply, instead of waiting
14 days drive to the great state
of Tom.
And purchase their firearms
legally go through a lawful
background check because these
are not individuals that are of
concern.
So then what will happen is our
local gun store in Carlsbad, our
local gun store and Artemisia,
Um local gun stores in Roswell
will essentially lose all of
this business.
And it would be unfortunate that
we're going to run.
Um
Some of our strong, um small
businesses that we all like to
tout when we have
Small business development day,
But then we're going to pass
legislation like this. We know
where the votes are. That
essentially are gonna run them
out of business and the
intentions are well and I don't
want to.
Um, seem like, you know, the
intentions aren't well and I do
appreciate the intent, but
The reality is the people who
passed the background check
instantly don't need a 14 Day
waiting period.
There's already a system in
place where if it's flagged
three days and then a lot of
times the gun owners of the
owner of the gun store
Has the discrepancy to say.
Probably shouldn't do this and
they don't
So I get there's there's a huge
push. Um, and pressure and
things from from people. But
these are all individuals that
don't understand.
Really how This system already
works and that it works well.
And
It's just not necessary.
And it's unfortunate in an
already polarized political
world.
That issues like this are
brought up.
Re polarizes everybody, its
neighbor against neighbor friend
against friend
Chavez County versus Burner Leo
County, Don't and a county
versus Eddy County.
And essentially, um
Just divide the state that
really at this point in time, I
wish
We could find some issues.
That we could come together on
because I really am sick and
tired of
The score being 27 to 15. I
don't like waking up every
morning coming to a committee.
As Senator Ivey Soto said it
We know where the votes are.
And it's just a sad day. Um
It really doesn't give me much
hope for this country really?
That this is
Where we're at. This is what
we're doing.
We wonder why
We see the things that we do on
the news. We see the things we
see people acting the way that
they do, because every single
person no matter where they are
on an issue fills like they're
being singled out or they're not
being protected. And let's be
honest. The republic was created
to protect
The minority of whatever the
issue was.
Whether it was agricultural
states whether it was states
that were further west and had
more forest or whatever the
issue was. The system was set up
to ensure that you didn't have
one populace.
Telling the more rural the less
populated folks how how to live
their lives.
It was to ensure that
The small colonies in the
Northeast.
Couldn't tell the states out
West.
What land management looked
like.
What farming look like and it's
just troubling to me.
That here we are again.
You know, it's not February 2nd,
but it sure as heck
Feels like it.
That we're just over the same
issue having the same fight.
And
It's just unfortunate.
I take my kids out shooting.
I teach them how to respect
firearms.
My little girl. She's six years
old.
Got her a cricket
It's a cute little 22 takes a
little single bullet little
cricket on it.
It's purple.
She was so excited.
One. It's an activity that her
and her daddy
Can go out and do that. I can
teach her to do something.
And she can enjoy it with her
dad. It's a very unique
Experience.
And bills like this aim to take
that away. If I don't think 14
days in advance to go by this
cricket for her birthday
present.
And and who? Who is this going
to save?
I'm not a threat to society.
I've already gone through the
background check so many times.
It's that probably popped up at
the very top of the list. Like
Oh, yeah.
Hurdle guy from Travis County
buying another gun.
And it's those types of issues
that I think we lose track of.
We see the headlines and we see
the things but you don't hear
about the times that I go out
with a 22 and I teach my little
girl.
How to shoot straight.
And she gets excited when she
hits the target, and and it's
just unfortunate because
To me. That is my culture.
That is my lifestyle.
And it's easy to sit up here.
And condemn it as somehow
there's something wrong with it.
Because there is nothing wrong
with it.
And I'm tired of people trying
to take it.
And yes, it does make me
emotional and polarized because
it is important to me.
My dad gave me a rifle taught me
how to shoot.
His dad did the same.
And it's important.
And you don't understand it, and
that's okay.
I don't understand soy lattes.
I ain't trying to outlaw.
They're weird. They taste funny.
But I'm not trying to tell you
how to live your life.
So stay out of mind.
I'm not trying to hurt anybody.
Keep the criminals from buying
guns. This doesn't do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Other members of the Thank
you, madam Chair. Um
You know, I want to tell you a
story and I'm gonna apologize
ahead of time, uh, to my friends
and neighbors back from Berlin.
Because I didn't ask him first.
I'm gonna tell you about a
Marine
His name is Sonny Rios. He's
deceased now.
Here's my next door neighbor
Growing up. He was the father of
my two neighbors. We lived on
first Street. Um, it was
Very lower Middle class
neighborhood.
Sunny Rios.
Spent his
Late teens.
In his early twenties in the
jungles of Vietnam.
Sunny Rios when you walked in
there
Modest home, and I mean modest
home When I tell you modest,
it's not how you're thinking.
I'll tell you what my my home
next door was, um, a palace
compared to it.
At the entry of his door.
On a circular framed
Back backsplash. I'll call it
above above their kitchen, as
you walked in was a slew of
metals for what he did for this
country. That man
Had scars on him that I can't
describe
He told me once.
After few drinks one night I was
a kid happened to be there.
About a story.
Where he was in an embankment in
a ditch.
Essentially secular like we have
here.
Only it was in Vietnam.
And they were in an intense
firefight with the other side
and a man stood up to throw a
grenade at his at his
His comrades that were with him
there.
And he shot that man.
And he killed him, but not
before he threw the grenade.
So that grenade went over and
above his head.
Into the group of the people
that he was there.
With
And it exploded. Now it hurt and
I don't know to what extent too
damaged his friends and his
buddies, but it did leave him a
back full of shrapnel.
And it did give him the Purple
heart.
That was up on his wall.
You want me to vote for this?
Piece of garbage.
And ask that man to wait 14 days
to buy a gun.
Hell, no.
I won't do it.
Never would. I do that?
I don't see an exemption for
that, and there's lots of people
out there like that.
But instead we're going to be
coming. Outlier 14 days we're
going to be radical. Let's be
radical.
I could go through this list of
stuff here that I have that will
tell you that it's not data
driven, and and how it uh how it
segregates people that that
should have arms and need the
arms for for good reasons, But
I'm not gonna do that because I
heard on the floor. I don't know
What was it yesterday or day
before? Where are good? Senator
Schmid's
Placed in the body's hands,
Reason
Reason when we were dealing with
that last horrible gun bill.
Why we should not adopt that.
But it goes on deaf years
because
Hey, it's 27 to 15.
And it's much easier to go out.
And restrain the public.
Because we can't address or
crime in this state because
somewhat he toe or someone's
heat to made a mistake, and they
killed somebody, and now we're
going to lock them up. No, we
revolve them out. They get a gun
illegally and data shows that
commit another crime. And then
they come knocking at sunny Rios
door.
And tell him he can't buy his
weapon for 14 days.
What a shame. What a disgrace.
Wake up New Mexico.
You all get to own this. I'm not
gonna mess with it.
You all own it. It's yours. You
disarm those people and you were
gonna go out on the floor if
this gets there, and I'm gonna
say the same thing on it on it.
It's a disgrace.
Other members of the committee.
Mr Chair. Uh, you know, we have
a motion pending. Ah, I'll just
mentioned
So in New Mexico 65% of gun
deaths are suicides.
Ah!
Sorry. In New Mexico. 65% of gun
deaths are suicides.
Uh huh.
Including my grandfather.
Um, anything we can do to reduce
suicides. I am all for
So we are on a motion for a do
passed to do a roll call,
though. China? Yes, I want to, I
would do one acknowledge and
respect the emotion.
Of the debate. My colleagues and
I'm privileged to chair this
committee and I
I appreciate always. Sometimes
we disagree to be respectful to
one another. I just wanna
acknowledge center portals,
comments and a pearl. Every
experience you just described. I
share. I own guns that were
owned by my grandfather.
I can't remember. Ever not
owning a gun. Um as a young man,
a pellet gun, Several firearms
on my own. The only thing that I
would I would ask us to do you
and me having this in common
sense. Hurdle is that as a gun
owner and I made no secret the
fact I'm a concealed carry
permit holder.
We have to be part of the
solution. We should be the
people that are part of the
solution and I'll just tell you
a center more is on the floor
today was touting his A rating
from the N R a
Term beaches here from the Great
Terra and I've been around long
enough to show tell you that I
was the deciding vote on the
concealed carry law.
I passed that law.
Long time ago.
And supporting concealed carry.
And one of the things that I put
into requirement in the
concealed carry law was that you
had to demonstrate proficiency
centripetal. You and I would
agree the importance of doing
that.
And I will tell you the NRA for
every year since I passed that
his criticized me and scored me
down and tried to undo that
requirement.
Of training, periodic training
and qualification.
There are those in the gun
debate who just will not accept
any not consider any reasonable
limitations on farms. It's an
absolutist position.
Pearl. You and I have to be part
of the solution. You are the
best people to be part of that
solution.
And I hope I can You always
managed care you don't you?
Don't let me addressing a member
individually because I don't
want to be disrespectful to. I
hope my words are coming across
as respectful.
To you, senator because I I
really do want to be part of the
solution and I will agree with
you. This bill is not going to
eliminate crime.
Probably not at all. That's not
the purpose behind this.
And I wont that that's a
different solutions for
different
Problem. But Senator doing is
right. You know, tell you that
you have that experience with
suicide. My best friend was a
doctor.
Rick doctor surgeon.
Um
Mental health suicide.
Is addressed by this bill. Thank
you.
Model roll call vote.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
You have a do pass, Senator.
Thank you very much. I don't
know if you want to recess er,
retake the chair first.
Alright. Senate judiciary is in
recess.
