The subject that has been in the
press
two years which is the intention
of individuals offers of
if you're in pain given the
nature of the crimes or
offenses.
Our system is a concept.
Bills to receive a lot of these
bills and a lot of things for us
yes I don't really have a this
committee so thank you for
the execution of the latest
version of the concept of really
building that we're.
And for with the exception.
letting her
to address the issues but we
have the usual talk a little bit
about the specifics of the
constitutional
Of.
So we have a Mr Baker
a representative government
division.
it started.
All right I just need to the
presenters.
with the.
I.
Asians are presentation so we
have a chance for.
Of this figure out the extent of
it.
Yes Sir Mr chair members the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak I will be
brief a second what room for not
only the other presenters that
may hope to educate this
committee but more importantly
to be available to service
committee in answering questions
that will hopefully arise in
this robust discussion which I
believe is the intent.
thank you for the introduction
my name is Benjamin Baker I
serve as the deputy cabinet
secretary the department of
public safety I am a veteran
police officer with twenty six
years experience here in New
Mexico I am the Santa Fe New
Mexico native on page capitalize
school down the road from the
new office I have which is the
department of public safety.
Tell you that about myself so
that when you hear me explain my
positions on this and opinions
will understand the context with
which are arriving to that.
Over the last year I've been
acting as the interim law
enforcement academy director for
state.
And that rule has significant
responsibilities the preceding
twenty six years I learned.
Less than I learned during my
time as the interim director the
only about our licensure and
about our responsibilities to
the communities with which we
serve.
That education brings me to be
in front of you today and
hopefully to share my
experiences on the internet
there's approximately eight
thousand percent constituency
represented by the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy this
certification and professional
licensure here in the state of
New Mexico between the two
professions one Forsman and
public safety telecommunications
today we're here to talk about
whether or not to criminal
defendants should be detained of
presumption of criminal charges
and probable cause that page.
I will likely be the only
attorney or non attorney that
you hear from and and despite
not being an attorney I have had
the distinction and the
opportunity to be able to
investigate criminally charge
participate as a witness in the
prosecution of criminal activity
in everyone of our judicial
districts and most of the
courthouses to support.
So I bring you that to tell you
that the position of not only
the department of public safety
a law enforcement officer with
twenty six years of experience
here in our state a multi
jurisdictional experience noting
the regionalization that exist
within the state of New Mexico.
despite the consistency and
steadiness of the loss or is a
regional population based
density issue that exists within
our state not only is it relates
to criminal charges.
But also law enforcement
recruitment and retention.
Proud to tell you that yesterday
we seated one of the largest
statewide law enforcement
academy classes in recent
history seventy one people came
two weeks ago to try out and
yesterday we welcomed sixty for
folks to our campus it was more.
And we can bear the some of the
pictures I showed members of the
audience before show could that
stretching from the front door
all the way to the dormitories
and we're so pleased that the
investments made by this
legislature by the executive in
law enforcement stimulating
recruitment and retention and we
are seeing the effects of the
place where I'm proud to serve
today.
In participating in criminal
prosecutions.
In participating in criminal
investigations we have the
dubious distinction law
enforcement first responders to
sit at the kitchen tables of New
Mexico residents were the
victims of criminal conduct.
We unfortunately with
Then more frequency than I would
like to tell you about have the
distinction of explaining to a
layperson.
as it relates to legal process
why the person that they believe
is the criminal offender in
their case is free pending their
trial.
Have done that more times than
than I could explain today and I
have listened to my constituency
of several thousand police
officers during my tenure at my
current job.
And this is not something that
is regional lies to just our
larger cities this is a
sentiment that is
Related to me by the entirety of
our constituency and the
students that we train in Law
Enforcement Academy the goal of
some of the legislation has been
introduced from the law
enforcement perspective and from
my position in the context that
I brought you.
Is to differentiate those folks.
Were probable causes been
determined are likely to re
offend in a way that endangers
the public for the victims in
the case it's previously
charged.
That is the goal and that is the
perspective from the law
enforcement side of this issue
there are many legal issues that
the the legal scholars and the
other experts that you have in
front of you and members who
serve on this committee will
will deliberate upon but I leave
you with the visualization of
sitting in a New Mexico kitchen
explaining to the victim of a
violent crime why there offender
does not remain in custody
during the pendency of their
trial in early to the difficulty
with which our law enforcement
professionals in men and women
that we asked to go to this work
have to train attempt to explain
to these folks I humbly stand
before this committee during the
remainder of this meeting to be
able to answer any subject
matter questions that may be of
service offer my perspective my
experiences and anything that I
can do that he can be assisted
in this necessary and important
discussion will be undertaken
suffering Mr chair thank you
thank you very much thank you
for a raise good presentation I
I'm glad you can revive for so
questions will go to the other
presenters I think it's probably
before we go to I think it's
really know where they've a
couple things one is
I'm I think we're we're all very
pleased to hear about your
graduating class
for sixty four new law
enforcement officers kudos to
governor I know that's the one
of her initiatives and to us we
we worked really hard this last
session on their crime omnibus
bill to do precisely this to
reconfigure the board itself the
composition of board the public
participation and oversight of
the board I bring that up
because we've watched in sadly
in the news last two days the
case of a tie read Nichols and
the abuse of of of of of force
and another life lost to by law
enforcement officers I think
we've done a lot New Mexico last
year to try to make sure that
doesn't happen here by the work
of this committee very frankly
so we're that's coming that's
one of our coming hearings is to
look at what we did and how of
the use of force will be a very
important subject for us in the
coming up in the coming set and
when the coming here and so
we're gonna have a specific
presentation on on use of force
in New Mexico law enforcement so
I wanted to do that thank you
graduate you on that class the
other thing I'll do is I'll just
of the committee the public will
allow me when we passed
legislation to.
Eliminate qualified immunity one
of the criticisms and and one of
the requirements made against
elimination of qualified
immunity that's the immunity
that allowed essentially or
prohibit lawsuits against law
enforcement for for those types
of crimes one of the arguments
made against eliminating
qualified immunity is that it
would discourage and chill those
of up line for law enforcement
positions and and hiring law
enforcement and it would seem
that your class is managing to
overcome whatever that whatever
that obstacle me again so that's
also very encouraging to hear as
well too but I appreciate that
will be a lot of questions about
that so I think probably and
your presentation will probably
give rise to some of those
things too and I appreciate very
much the fact that you begin by
saying you're maybe the only low
follower on the on the committee
a presentation today but that is
an important perspective for us
to have as well to so thank you
for that public comments to
questions we Mr Brigman when you
come up and take the next ten to
fifteen minutes.
Yes.
File by.
We celebrated on the floor we
celebrate all if a UNM the UNM
day here in the legislature and
so Senator Wirth made a point of
on the floor today talking about
him in IBM Law School classmates
and Mr Brigman was Year two
ahead of us I guess but also at
UNM law school of the same time
I was there and I think you had
a black cap and to.
Memory serves me right so some
things haven't changed in the
almost thirty probably thirty
years so Mr chairman Mr chairman
senators
thank you for this opportunity.
My name is Sam Bregman on the
district attorney for Bernalillo
county which includes
Albuquerque New Mexico.
I have practice in the area of
criminal law for thirty years as
a prosecutor and a defense
lawyer.
I have also spent a large part
of my practice in the area of
constitutional rights.
The first thing I want you all
to know from me.
Is that with every fiber of my
body I believe and support the
concept that every person who is
charged with a crime is presumed
to be innocent at all stages of
the criminal proceeding until
and unless he or she is found
guilty in a court of law.
I start there because I happen
to see the
agenda for today's hearing and I
saw all the title guilty until
proven innocent.
I I know maybe that was to for
whatever purpose that was I and
that is completely one hundred
percent against everything I
believe in I have been fortunate
to to be practicing in in our
criminal justice system for a
long time and I respect
that presumption of innocence to
my core.
Up today I want to share my
perspective a little bit on what
I believe is necessary to
improve the criminal justice
system.
And specifically in the area of
pre trial detention and the
presumption of course which is
being discussed and as the
chairman said it's been
Talked about quite a lot lately
in the last couple years Rio.
I'm grateful to you Mr chairman
for convening this meeting.
I fully support.
The concept of establishing a
rebuttable presumption when a
defendant is likely to pose a
threat to the safety of others
pending trial when no conditions
of release will reasonably
protect the safety of people in
the community.
Now useful comparison.
Is found in the federal system
which is codified and defined in
eighteen US.
C. thirty one forty two.
I'm not suggesting anything
more.
But to have a similar process in
our state quarters as we do in
the federal courts when it comes
to the most serious crimes in
pre trial detention.
If someone.
Is got a certain record for
dangerous agency level because
of what a crime they're charged
with or what they have been
convicted of previously.
And that person appears in state
court.
It may be a very different
outcome of for the same charges
if that person appears in
federal court.
Just a few facts so you know
about pre trial detention as far
as my office is concerned.
Since two thousand seventeen
when the pre trial detention
process was implemented in the
office more than six thousand
motions to to detain over five
thousand defendants have been
made these individuals represent
sixteen percent of the don't
felony defendant population.
On average fifty point seven
percent of pretrial detention
motions are granted meaning that
the defendant is detained.
Going on though an examination
of the two thousand eight
hundred and forty five
defendants.
That the the pre trial detention
motion was denied another words
they were released approximately
one in five twenty one point
four percent of released
defendants are charged with new
offenses committed when their
original pretrial detention
motion case is still pending.
To date these offenses comprise
eight hundred and forty seven
cases.
Of which forty nine percent are
violent.
Fifty percent of the new
currents is no of the new
offenses occur within four
months of the pretrial detention
motion hearing.
Now.
I have handouts if if if if the
the committee wants someone
happy given after this perhaps
but I want to give you an
example of an instance that's
recently taken place.
Going back a little while on
June twenty fourth of two
thousand sixteen a man was
convicted of second degree
murder with a firearm
enhancement convicted goes to
present.
Previously on December second of
two thousand twelve he had pled
guilty already to trafficking
heroin while he was in prison.
On October second of two
thousand nine the same person
was charged with armed robbery
that case was later dismissed.
After this individual got out
from PRI's for his murder
charge.
He was arrested for a stolen
vehicle so he goes to prison for
the second degree murder the
fireman enhancement he gets let
out he was arrested for stolen
vehicle in a felon in possession
of a firearm.
My office funded pre tax pre
trial detention motion.
To keep this person detained for
trial that motion was denied
just last year in August.
Last month.
This person was charged with
first degree murder for a murder
that took place last year.
My office filed another
detention motion asking that
this convicted of murder who is
now charged with another first
degree murder to be detained
until trial.
That motion was heard just
twenty days ago.
That motion for pre trial
detention was denied.
Where in this country is that
acceptable.
Where.
Where is a convicted murder who
was again charged with first
degree murder allowed to be
released pre trial no way that I
know of except Albuquerque New
Mexico.
That person now.
Right eight still presumed
innocent of the underlying
charges.
Is on an ankle.
Well how does an ankle monitor
provide safety to the community.
Doesn't stop them from shooting
somebody else it doesn't stop
him from committee perhaps some
other type of violent crime and
we can list them all doesn't
stop any of that.
So it may help with the
prosecution down the road if he
still left the ankle bracelet on
and didn't cut it off of where
he was so we could locate down
the road but law enforcement
doesn't it doesn't even have
access to real time of where
that ankle bracelet is real
time.
So.
That we face is we are having
people known to be violent.
We're charge was such violent
offenses.
That they get back out in the
community.
Of over four hundred cases of
which were violent.
So.
It's no secret that we have a
crime a real crime problem in in
Albuquerque from Bernalillo
county.
It's also no secret that we have
too many people on the streets
that are dangerous and have
proven themselves to be a threat
to the safety of our community.
I would respectfully submit to
you Mr chairman and members of
this committee senators.
Enough's enough.
This time this year with this
legislature.
We need to fix this problem.
Because if you just kick the can
down the road again.
How many lives will be ruined.
We come back to one last thing.
And I'm happy to answer any
questions you may have.
I under stand.
The.
Presumption.
Of innocence I believe as well
as anybody and as I started off
my remarks.
That goes all the way down to my
core I believe.
But I also believe.
That the community at large that
the people out there that all of
us represent I represent you
Representative have a right to
feel some type of safety.
I don't need you you all know
the state constitution as well
as any but I just remind
everybody article two section
for the New Mexico constitution.
All persons are born equally
free and have certain natural
inherent and inalienable rights
among which are the rights of
enjoying and defending life and
liberty of acquiring possessing
and protecting property and of
seeking and obtaining safety and
happiness.
How are we giving people in our
community the opportunities to
obtain safety and happiness.
When we are letting convicted
murderers who are charged with
murder again.
Out on an ankle bracelet.
Mr answer any questions we all
have.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate your passion I think
it's pretty clear dollars
although I'll tell you a couple
things that will come back with
your questions you very M. by
question the title of the agenda
let me tell you that I as a
chair take responsibility for
setting the Tyler Jennifer and I
do it in part to get your blood
going.
and I succeeded very
purposefully that's that's my
nature is to try to Stoke the
fires a little bit because these
are important issues and I agree
also just make a quick note
missed Revenue then I remember
this the couple years ago I took
a great deal of criticism from
the governor on down for a
statement I may which is exactly
the same and you just may is
that Albuquerque problem
very serious Albuquerque problem
of course now what is the
problem in Albuquerque affects
all of us statewide but the
opportunity to fix it is within
our grasp there's no doubt in my
mind and and we'll talk a bit
about the fact that I I wonder
how much of that falls on us as
legislators and how much of that
falls on
look with the questions that you
didn't answer which we coming
for you which is the pre trial
detention motions are not being
granted we have horrible people
in society there on the streets
and I think I heard that pretty
log closely from you and I agree
with you hundred percent.
Why is that happening is that
happening because the courts are
not doing their job.
Is it because the district
attorney the prosecutors are not
doing their job is because law
enforcement officers are not
doing their job.
And at the risk of continue to
get myself into trouble with
this one but we can't pass laws
here to get people off their
****
and
Joanne that for a few minutes
and we'll come back and I'll let
you answer them too but but
there's another little poke
right a poke at the system so
we'll come back to you Mr
pregnant Kim Chavez Cook is next
for the public defender to.
After that what do you do.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee for
having me here and having this
conversation really appreciated
it's obviously been a very
important issue for our state
for a few years now I first
apologize I did not go to your
school so that happy of an
ending my parents both went to
you and I'm so I'm still a big
fan.
I went to the university of
Denver so left for couple years
came back so
I don't want to necessarily at
least in my initial remarks I
enter into a debate around what
went wrong in individual cases
why particular motions might not
have been granted as the
chairman just pointed out there
could be a number of
explanations for that
but also I believe he
committee's inquiry today to be
about the constitutionality of
rebuttable presumptions in
particular and I'm an appellate
attorney so I did my homework so
I'm gonna focus on that issue
and can certainly get into
anything else the committee
wants to talk about during to
question and answer section
I think it will surprise
probably no one in this room
that it is my view that
rebuttable presumptions are
unconstitutional the
constitution of New Mexico is
very clear that the state bears
a burden of proof of clear and
convincing evidence and any use
of a rebuttable presumption
relying on different evidence to
meet that burden is directly
contrary to that constitutional
provision interpreting that
provision the New Mexico Supreme
Court has made it clear time and
time again that the state's
detention burden has to
requirements the first is
dangerous nis and the second is
that no conditions of release
will reasonably protect the
community last year when this
issue was before the legislature
we were making a lot of
prognosticating.
And trying to anticipate what
the Supreme Court might say in
response to rebuttable
presumptions legislation if it
were enacted but we have now
have the benefit of the June
twenty twenty two opinion from
the New Mexico Supreme Court
state the musket and a Haidle
which was decided after that
debate and now provides a little
bit of guidance the opinion
states that the nature of the
imported reiterates of that had
been established before that the
nature of current charges the
nature and circumstances
including the underlying
perhaps activating circumstances
of the current charges can all
be enough to satisfy the first
prong of the state's evidentiary
burden that is dangerous agency
that there's no question that
someone having committed a very
dangerous crime or having
probable cause that they have
can satisfy that problem but the
court also made it very clear
that the nature and
circumstances of the charges
can not also satisfy the second
prong of that yes and the court
went to great lengths to say
that if we rely on the same
thing to establish both prongs
we have functionally eliminated
the existence of two prongs and
so it decisional evidence is
required in paragraph thirty six
of that opinion the court says
to allow the state to rely
solely on the nature and
circumstances of the charged
defenses not only to provoke
prove that the defendant poses a
future threat to others or the
community but also to prove that
no release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person in the
community would all but
eliminate article two section
thirteen and the corresponding
constitutional burden of the
state in my view rebuttable
presumptions based on probable
cause of the charges
establishing the state's burden
of proof or even subject to
rebuttal establishing the
state's burden is exactly what
the Supreme Court has said is
not consistent with the constant
constitution.
So that seems to me to squarely
answer the question frankly by
to the extent that the proposed
there's also a separate
constitutional concern around
burden shifting which I'm happy
to get into but I don't even
know that it's necessary
my understanding and I think it
was confirmed today by by Mr
Bergman's remarks is that the
proponents of rebuttable
presumptions want to follow the
facts they want to follow the
approach used by the federal
pre trial release system which
has a statutory presumption
rebuttable presumption for
certain crimes there is there's
some problems with that first of
course is the New Mexico
constitution has very specific
language that the federal
constitution does not that's
hurdle number one for that
approach the other issues are
more structural there are
differences in the way that the
federal courts work the way that
the federal constitution and the
statutory scheme interact with
each other that do not you
cannot pick that system up and
then just lay it on top of New
Mexicos existing system so
federal laws pre trial release
approach is based on a
completely different structures
I said there's bail eligibility
that is statutory the bail
Reform Act provides in one
provision that Dale can only be
denied if there's no combination
of conditions that can assure
appearance focused on appearance
New Mexico's constitution when
it was amended there was a very
careful effort to avoid flight
risk as a specifically and owned
and sold basically for detention
we chose an approach that relies
on monetary bail to ensure
appearance rather than using
that as a way to hold people
and then there's a separate
provision in the bill Reform Act
that creates rebuttable
presumptions based on the
charges and potential penalties
but those provisions are part of
a single statutory scheme so the
federal courts have harmonized
them Bipin concluding that this
is not a burden shift there's
just.
The defendants have to show
something but they don't have to
meet a particular burden and
they were doing this under a
legislative intent analysis I
understand that I'm in a room of
not only lawyers and hopefully
this is this is landing with
some of the lawyers in the room
by contrast are availability is
entirely constitutional so any
interpretation of the New Mexico
statute that was passed cannot
trigger the same will just read
the constitution to harmonize it
with the statute the
constitution is always going to
be preemptive it's always going
to have greater authority than
any statute that we can pass so
that means makes the federal
authority just up on helpful in
opposite more critically our
constitution says that but with
specific language that the
prosecuting authority must prove
by clear and convincing evidence
the federal statute just as the
court must provide so a
rebuttable presumption relieves
the state of a burden it doesn't
just provide the court with
guidance on how what to provide
so that's another significant
language difference that I think
affects the analysis this is
very dry I realize but I think
the crucial distinction between
the two systems is important for
analyzing any approach to
rebuttal presumptions so
anything that has language in it
that says shall presume is going
to be problematic
I think the other issue is
looking at the federal system
the federal pre trial release
program in isolation because
that exists in the context of
other federal statutes including
the speedy trial act which
requires prosecutors to bring a
courts to bring a case to trial
within seventy days so that
means that the pre trial
detention has a presumptive
maximum of seventy days barring
special circumstances in the
twenty twenty one analysis done
by UNM's institute of Social
Research they found that New
Mexico defendants who were
detained we're health for
meeting of two hundred and
twelve days awaiting trial which
is fully three times that
federal time line for trial so
holding.
How rebuttable presumptions and
isolation saying let's just do
that part like the feds do it
that's all well and good but
then we are going to run into
speedy trial constitutional
violations downstream so we
can't just take one piece of the
federal approach without
adopting the other and the other
practical distinction is that
despite having those
presumptions in place that are
courts are also making release
decisions in an entirely
different pre different to pre
trial supervision infrastructure
they have different environments
for pre trial supervision they
have halfway houses and
treatment systems that we just
don't have in place in New
Mexico yet so there's a lot to
to distinguish the two systems
the last thing I want to mention
in terms of
and again focusing on the
constitutionality down other
downstream constitutional
considerations has to do with
jail conditions so if we were to
adopt an approach like
preventable presumptions which
the numbers folks at UNM have
calculated how many additional
people within and jail I think
it's really important to keep in
mind that holding presumptively
innocent people in in already
overcrowded jails with very
reduced staffing
and could lead to additional
constitutional concerns frankly
I think we're there already but
if any increase in in the
numbers certainly is going to
force in that situation so those
were my constitutional
highlights.
And I do have a you know data
and I have other legal analysis
I can find the committee on
particular topics but.
That was that was my
constitutional sales pitch Mr
chair.
Right so I imagine this is close
to.
And all four of that I I just a.
I don't think Mexico City
surprise anybody the room that
I've been pretty outspoken
public plea that I share your
opinion that the presumption
initiatives of the predecessor
district attorney and I'm allow
you some time to get your few
variants on where you want to
add on this agency recommend but
also the executive branch to
suggest this is a solution in my
opinion is clearly
unconstitutional I think frankly
the court is set of signals as
much as well too and even some
cleared as the basis and so I I
wonder whether we spent we spent
two years advocating this is one
of the keys to solving our crime
problem in New Mexico with
something that's just clearly
never gonna pass any lawful
scrutiny whether we're just
Shining everybody on and and or
when would we we better be
better off spending our time and
effort on talking to things that
are really going to make a
difference as opposed to get the
public's blood boil.
But that's my editorials again
flew over the gasoline on the
fire works well for you to so
Senator and then Senator with a
figure of tensions Senator
Stewart you're gonna go for I am
Mr chairman not being an
attorney I'm going to do my pass
the stupid questions in the
beginning when you all come off
of us actually I have a question
for Mr Brigman.
First of all I want to tell you
that no I've I've tried to
understand this for years now
and
so I talked to a lot of people
about what's actually happening.
So I talked to one of those
Supreme Court justices.
And they told me that they had a
workgroup that came down and
looked at the second judicial
district looked up the
prosecution papers for these
defendants.
And they could not find the word
danger this.
In those prosecution documents.
What what they seem to imply is
that what's all good and well
but if you don't prove that
dangerous just if you don't even
ten.
then
that's certainly a factor in
what's happening.
but what I want to ask you is
that.
So what's to cease.
These folks when they are on
bail.
You know before constitutional
amendment we had fail everywhere
they'll funds month everywhere
they'll hate us because of
Twitter chopped up so these
folks that.
Constantly so they were out
running around on bail what is
the difference between that and
the what we're doing now with
the few mistakes.
Thank you Mr chairman.
A couple things I wanted to just
first of all I don't know about
this committee said when the
Supreme Court came prosecution
papers out of the timing of that
for your time okay so I I really
can't speak to that I don't know
I don't know what papers were
talking about that and that the
were dangerous is in existence I
will say that I think we all can
agree that people are convicted
murderers are dangerous.
that that is a dangerous person
and then when they are charged
with offenses that can go to
that issue as well but to answer
your direct questions the hi I
you know I am not and a
knowledgeable person I'm just
telling you what the Supreme
Court justice said to me
I don't know how to respond well
I'm not asking you to respond to
it I'm only ask you to respond
to my question what I'm gonna do
right now okay.
Sir.
So first of all I don't I I
don't agree with the idea that
everybody that right now we're
doing pre trial detention
motions on got out with it was
the same exact circumstances in
our when the bail system was in
place right I don't agree with
that premise by itself that that
people for example the person I
just described would have
anybody bail him out or that he
can afford to be built at a time
I am personally was all for sale
important promises because we
don't want people staying in
jail just because they can't
afford bail out I'm one hundred
percent behind but in the very.
Specific cases of violent
offenders who can who who show a
propensity that they are
dangerous and they also there's
no way to protect the community
I've heard the same arguments
will continue conditions of
release to protect what what
what condition of release can I
can you think of.
That would be put in place that
this can be released I just
described back out in the
community what possible thing
it's not a matter of getting
guns because when he was
convicted the first time in let
out he knows there are certain
rules as he fell and you are not
allowed to have the fire so we
completely blew that off if you
will and while he was out he
doesn't care or observed that
rule so what possible condition
could be put in place for
someone like that to make sure
that the community is safe
because he doesn't care he
doesn't and ankle brace that
doesn't do it Mr Chairman I I I
just don't think it behooves us
to focus on one case
it just wait a minute it just
doesn't make any sense to me now
somebody dropped the ball I
agree with you was that the
judge.
That did the I mean I don't know
what the right term is
prosecutors are supposed to show
that these defendants need to be
helped I have that right okay so
somewhere in those documents
there needed to be clear
convincing evidence that that
he's dangerous I don't know if
that was in there certainly
after talking to the Supreme
Court justice who said the file
after file after file you read
that they're not making the case
so a little bit on them and what
what happened with the judges is
subject to just doesn't ever
believe in detaining people I
don't know I don't want to talk
about individual cases I really
want us to talk globally which
is the point of my question and
so globally I I hope I addressed
some of that globally when I
talked about the number of
offenses for example and how
many of I so there is a serious
problem out there and I I don't
want to re hash the bail issue
when that someone is bill but I
know this is the issue now I
know that eight hundred and
forty seven cases
half of those are by that's two
hundred and R. four hundred and
twenty some cases okay so I do
know is from I will not I'm not
going to criticize any judge
they live in our community as
well that's not my goal or or
interest to do that what what
what we.
No I'm not criticizing anybody
here your system legislative
back I think you every day to do
Senator it's amazing what you on
the criticizes you I'm asking
for help okay.
Those are all my questions Mr
Chairman.
Make you.
Perhaps you should do it.
Thank you Mr chair so I have a
question about this eight
hundred forty seven cases
So when you say forty nine
percent of the more violent you
mean the the underlying charge
the original tires that the
person has them not been
detained on those are violent.
yes okay.
And you said that the in those
eight hundred forty seven cases.
Forty four.
Right forty nine percent of the
underlying charges were violent
and then there were new charges
picked up
Mr chair Mister recommend fusion
I think I because I think I'm it
because for let me see if I can
if I can just.
Of the two hundred I'm sorry the
two thousand eight hundred forty
five defendants which the court
denied our pre trial detention
motion shows that approximately
one in five of those on little
bit over twenty percent actually
twenty one point four percent.
Of released defendants are
charged with new offenses
committed while their original
pre trial detention cases still
pending today these offenses
comprise eight R. forty seven of
half of which I hope I answered
your question yes so yes I
understand that of the new
charges that are being picked up
in that forty nine percent
How many of them are those new
charges are those for violent
crimes as violent crime forty
nine percent so that four
hundred and some.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm a little confused by this
because the numbers that you're
giving us don't correspond with
numbers that we've heard Mr
chair from but it's been and
every other situation where
we've been getting data on this
areas of backs.
I'm very confused about why your
numbers are what they are
persons of all the other the
other numbers that we see I can
tell you where this was sourced
from so we have an analyst with
three analysts in our crime
strategies unit and they have a
pretty good handle I would
suggest to you on all things
involving our cases they can
pull up the court cases of
course whoever case management
system they can track every all
these folks they can go back and
find out what for example
happened they help they help
prepare things when we need the
preparation to go into these pre
trial detention motions because
we just don't do it **** nilly
on these to be done for the
right cases not for everybody by
any means but for the right
cases so these are the numbers
that they gave me I I trust that
office that they've searched to
that I don't I don't know the
other numbers you look at I have
seen or heard some other numbers
but I can't tell you what the
differences I can't tell you of
if one entity or entity is
looking at different with these
are the cases I am very
confident that we filed over six
thousand motion since two
thousand seventeen detained
pendants that in compromise
about five thousand defendants
I'm very confident that on
average fifty point seven
percent of them all of the PBMs
are granted so about half of the
pre trial detention of I'm I'm
I'm confident that about half of
them are grant
but but the other the other half
the numbers what I am being told
a very specific of the two
thousand it's very down to the
number we follow the motions are
officer fund the motions we know
which cases they are so when we
file these specific pre trial
detention motions and Bernalillo
county from our office there's
two thousand eight hundred forty
five defendants that were that
we were denied our motion of
approx of those approximately
one in five committed a crime.
And Mister chair Mister pregnant
I think where the numbers are
starting to get to not to
correspond with what we're
hearing otherwise is is what
you're saying that that new crop
that those new crimes they were
charged with our violent crimes
that forty nine percent of those
new crimes are violent crimes
that that does not correspond to
anything we have heard before so
I would encourage your office to
to figure out where that
discrepancy is will because we
need it we need to when we're
making policy decisions that are
going to impact the lives of New
Mexicans both victims and the
accused we need to have reliable
data that that we are looking at
to do that and having new out
liar numbers thrown out there
gives me great pause
I want to ask Miss at Travis
cook what was the name of the
case that you referenced it from
June of last year thank you Mr
chairman Senator at St the
muscadine Ohio and may I just C.
A. R. E. and hyphen title AJ
ideally I can be citation or
copy that's highlighted in pink
if you would like but it's
twenty twenty two NMSC fifteen.
And so Mister chair Mister
chairman my question is I is
this a case that that you're
familiar with and and and what
I.
Because from what Mr I've not
read this case from what Mr
Abbas cook was saying.
It would not be a great use of
our legislative time and energy
to pass a bill that is likely to
be quickly overturned as
unconstitutional.
Based on what what that case
would appear to Representative
so I I if you're familiar with
the case I'd I'd love to hear
your your thoughts on how to
lose a case which the Supreme
Court said that the second prong
of the detention hearing motion
was not was not argued by the
state of New Mexico at the time
and it was not given sufficient
evidence to the court to support
a finding that there is no
reasonable conditions to release
that falls a Taurus K. before
there's one unfit for getting in
the middle but there was
basically three point three
cases that discuss that very
issue
about whether or not the DA's
office for spotting the
necessary information the
Supreme Court took took took
with the entire record made the
decision that that the district
attorney's office at the time
was not providing mission that
advocates for the second problem
second product.
And I I can't speak to that
other than I can tell you that
since I've been in the DA's
office that is something we are
emphasizing over and over again
and I know the Senate doesn't
want to talk about specific
cases or wall but I will tell
you that overall we are we are
doing everything we possibly
can.
Everything to provide courts
with the necessary information
that we have.
But I would throw that question
and I know that this committee
is recently discussed the
article and a and a whole all
the subjects around the and
that's very important as well
obviously some good information
but the same time some real
problematic ways in which that's
being used to Bernalillo county
I think.
When you talk about how you can
get reasonable that there are no
reasonable conditions that can
be provided.
To protect someone what are the
reasonable conditions when you
have a convicted murder charges
of murder again that's just an
example what are they going to
pay off because I I agree with
Senator Stewart I I don't think
it's helpful for us to be
focusing on on a single case
this this is kind of a global
issue but I guess what my
question really is is because
what something Mr Giles coke
said about that case that can't
resonated with me was that by
looking only to the charges in
the circumstances of the
charges.
To satisfy both of those prongs
whether whether the DA's offices
is providing the information for
both products are not think
that's a separate issue but but
sat looking to satisfy both
prongs with that single with
with essentially one piece of
information of what the charges
the that that in and of itself
renders it.
Renders the the whole yes
meaningless
and that that's if if you have
an interpretation of the case
that's that's different than
that because here that but but
it and if but if not if that's
what the case says what how are
we protecting our communities by
passing a law that is going to
be found unconstitutional based
on the precedent that is there
this you know that I would say
that I have a lot of lawyers the
DA's office of bills that could
be found unconstitutional and
for the public defender's office
has a lot of lawyers that they
say will be found constitutional
I respect the chairman's
position on that I respect all
of the the fund lawyers on this
committee and other lawyers in
the committee members but that
is something for the Supreme
Court to decide I think on the
constitutionality of legislation
passed I certainly don't believe
it's a yeah I don't want anybody
to waste our time your time is
too valuable with what you do
every day and I don't believe by
any means that the pass a
rebuttal presumption for pre
trial detention is not a very
very good thing to do for this
legislature I'm pretty adamant
the other way I.
So what also was said or or what
was kind of alluded to I think
in your question the online
basically please tell me if I'm
wrong is that
you you can consider the fact
that if you say he's a and I I'm
just saying examples because I
don't know I'm not using a
specific cases I'm just saying
example of someone is not
serious violent criminal history
that by its nature may go to the
very issue of whether or not
there any reasonable conditions
that can make sure the community
is safe that goes to that issue
so when you talk when you say
well you just use that for the
first part but you can't use of
the second problem that doesn't
make any clear sense in the
sense of course we want to
fashion if they are conditions
release so that someone doesn't
do violence again on another
human being and I'm not so sure
that that can't be used for both
of us that's not the only thing
you should use but it's kind of
a it's kind of proving if you
will well.
Conditions released what could
be if.
When when we have a propensity
for someone and not fall the
rules is doing violent things
how was that not showing how is
that not showing that there's
conditions of release the
committee for the safety of the
community I think it is and and
Mr chair just recommend that.
It sounds to me like you're
because you said that violent
history of that bad to me is
different than the current
violence charge where there the
accused but but I I want to move
on to that I I have two more
questions a both of which are
for just missed at Travis cook
the first is
so that case which I've already
forgotten the name of
is that out of the second
judicial what did what district
is that out of Mister chairman
Senator it is out of the second
judicial and is it being
appealed.
Mr Chairman oh sorry.
Look at me that's why I.
Mister chairman Senator it this
was the yield so it was yield to
the New Mexico Supreme Court the
state constitutional question
and to the right okay that one
last question for you just have
as cook what on on this this
data issue which is
I find troublesome what is act
I'd like you to share your
thoughts on that sure thank you
Mr chairman and senator I I
agree with your assessment at
those to the consistent numbers
I hear from other sources are
looking different and so I I
would also love to know what the
district attorneys sort of
methodology looks like I do the
one thing that comes to mind as
a possible source of different
numbers would be what they are
using is the definition of a
violent offense what does that
include and perhaps it is
different from what other folks
are using to qualify as being
violent I will say that that I
just are the institute of Social
Research is numbers the last
time that they publish them was
that the people committing new
crimes on release at five
percent of those were violent
crimes and I I just wanted to
also like is the flip side to
that date and it's sort of in
the the vein of we don't want to
you know provided the lowest
common denominator we wanted
provided because this one guy
who got out or what have you
that the flip side to the
concern around someone being
released in committing a
terrible crime is that the risk
of over inclusiveness and false
positives of just assuming that
someone is dangerous because of
the current charges and I I
again I would you know reiterate
your your comment that the
rebuttable presumption statute
or build doesn't say is charged
with such and such a crime and
has a violent history if that
language was also in there this
would be a different
conversation but it's really
just based on the current
charges but with that said it we
have our own we also keep
internal data it's not really
qualified it's just sort of a
pass fail of motions granted
motions denied and then what
happens with the case so I.
I flag for the committee that
our data shows that of the of
twenty three point eight percent
of the defendants detained in
Albuquerque where the motion was
granted between twenty seventeen
to twenty twenty two so this
whole time period where we've
had this this system in place
we're not alternately convicted
of anything.
And an additional hundred and
twenty defendants or almost five
percent ended up leading down to
a misdemeanor so those people
were held in detention and we're
not convicted of anything or
were convicted of a misdemeanor
that's the flip side of that
data and I think it's also needs
to be part of that conversation
so thank you for the question.
There were.
Mr chair thank you The
presentation
again I'll start of the data
talk about the data with the art
of tool it does feel Mr very
much good you probably heard
some of that presentation maybe
did talking Arnold well again
we've got independent groups of
look at the data and the numbers
just look different I guess my
question for you is is the DA's
office in the second willing to
share the data that you use to
make the determinations of how
you file these motions one
hundred percent.
So Mister chair feels to me like
one of the most important things
we can do is somehow figure out
a way to get people with the
data into the same room you know
with some independent folks and
maybe we need to get resources
to do some of that so that we
can actually figure out because
it's really difficult when you
getting such a disparate range
of numbers to kind of get you
handle hands around what's going
on that.
So I just think that's super
important number one second
thing I want to go back I think
Senator Stewart is actually
right to to talk about life
after the.
Constitutional amendment versus
before then they give you said
three thousand.
Dangerous defendants have been
health
and under the previous system
quite frankly many of those
probably didn't get out only
because they couldn't they don't
have the resources to post the
post a bond in that you know
justice Daniels in the decision
that really rules the move away
from money bail found it was
unconstitutional you recognize
that you can't have you can't
treat people in charge of the
same crime and someone's able to
go get grandma's house and put
that up and they're out the
first on the street the other
one sits in there but I think
that the the challenge of that
is that the old system did keep
some dangers defenders the
budget simply because they could
pay so that was a fundamental
problem with the system
I do I'm just.
I want to go back to kind of the
presumption of innocence that
you started with and the burden
of being on the state I just I
just have a really again I'm not
a criminal lawyer but I
practiced law for more than
thirty years and I'm just having
trouble kind of reconciling.
Your belief in that presumption
and and believe in the burden
being on the state yet you're
here asking us to flip that.
And to do so I mean it you
shaking your head but I think
that's what that's what part
present recordable presented
does it basically says you're
gonna stay now you if I use the
numbers you know the other let's
say the other three thousand
that that work grant to or that
you know where your motion
wasn't granted the came out I
mean let's say eighty percent of
those then.
Under about presumption they're
basically gonna have to show a
judge.
That they're not dangerous.
How do you reconcile that with
with the fundamental premise
that you you correctly I think
it's state that under system
you're presumed innocent until
proven guilty by the state.
Mister chairman Senator thanks
for the question I continued to
wholeheartedly believe the stage
someone just because of the set
throughout the state.
We're talking specifically.
Not whether or not they're
presumed guilty or innocent
right then we're talking about
to pay them for the safety of
the public during that time
frame because they've they've
proven themselves will pose
themselves as a threat so yes
well I I I I absolutely believe
someone's as we're talking about
pre trial detention it doesn't
mean that everybody saying
you're guilty of of the
underlying crime it means you
have shown such a propensity in
your past that you are a danger
to the community analysts to
rebut that presumption based on
your your your prior.
Activities if you will and the
nature of the charge the fact
that you are.
Willing to use violence with
firearms on a continual basis.
That is a rebuttable presumption
my money that should be
acceptable to allow for people
to be held for the safety of the
community because just as
important as a constitutional
right and I one hundred percent
behind undefended white.
What people stand next to me
I've done that but at the same
time the neighbors in our
communities the people that live
in our communities also when
when someone has established and
proven themselves constantly day
in and day out that they are
violent towards other human
beings with firearms that we
should have a rebuttable
presumption to hold them until
that trial that's the
distinction I make and perhaps
you'll see it and I understand
that because it's a but I do
believe that distance it doesn't
mean that we're saying you're
guilty present guilty it just
means we were presuming the
there are no quote there's no
ability to let you out the
community right now to try
stated on that's based on a
finding of probable cause this
is a private they're charged
with.
This is important.
Mr chairman I already have one
in my purse but I find version I
mean it means basically that the
the charge that's put there's
been a finding of probable cause
that that there's a new charge
of sufficient and and again
that's a very different
standards and clear convincing
evidence I mean would you agree
yes Sophocles's Representative
instead order order for the
problem though is that based on
a probable costs standard which
is nowhere in the constitution
you're basically saying that
someone that the state is going
to hold someone.
Because of the way they've been
charged and again I I I hear
what you're saying about the
specific cases I just.
I'm just having a hard time
reconciling the house.
With where you started.
I totally respect that Mister
chairman Senator I do I don't
know what I'm gonna be able to
say to change that but I feel
this way pretty strong I
appreciate that and I think this
is the exact kind of discussions
we need to have a park or is
when you're asking.
You know us to pass a law that
may feel good and feels good to
a lot of folks I'm not
minimizing that because I get
the I get the fear etcetera.
But when it just flies in the
face of exactly where you
started and this is just a
disagreement that you and I may
have.
I just think I have a hard time
with that I really do and again
I've been up here long enough
that you know sometimes you
gotta take votes that are that
are that are tough.
But that that the court.
Kind of address what's in here
and so this is a good discussion
happened and I really appreciate
it and I'll just and again with
that the piece about the date.
We've got to get the data
figured out the cause of the
other piece we you know we can
debate this all day long but the
fact of the matter is it feels
like we need to do something to
get everybody in the room and I
appreciate you being willing to
put the cards on the table this
is what we're doing this is
where we're coming from and
let's just see if we can't get
that piece chairman Senate just
in response to that
I I I I didn't know specifically
where the where the other
numbers are all coming from the
you're comparing this to centers
but yes I'm happy that my office
meet with anybody you want to
sit in a room and actually say
this is how we got these numbers
and let other people say we
didn't consider this using that
so that that's fine with me I
think that's really important to
you saying there is one hundred
percent for these the numbers
are given me I but I trust and
believe them if they're made a
mistake let's find out but I
don't think they have but we
figured out I appreciate that
thank you Mr use.
I'll get to my questions a
little bit of Sony on apple
evidence of recent without the
great I think I do have to
consider
the
also thank you both for coming
you know as a non lawyer but as
is as a representative from my
district you know I can just I'm
here to listen and learn a lot
but it's I I just really share
Senator.
Stewart's.
Antipathy towards legislation by
personal anecdote I mean I I
just really have a hard time
with that at the same time I
have heard more than one
example from my district I mean
there's plenty of personal
anecdotes that that
you know with really really
concerns me so I just don't know
what this is I just feel like
yes.
After a certain point enough of
these at these.
Situation seems to be in center
whether in the media or from
people that I know in my
district expressed concern
it would be very helpful as
senator Wirth is saying to get
the data reconcile we're hearing
two totally different narratives
but I I just wanted to add that
this is my two cents worth thank
you thank you.
Join by Senator more our story
Morrison I'm I'm happy to have
the
of the minority party joining us
some you miss some interesting
stimulating all of us and
actually listen saw the range of
good gossip so good will hope
you came with a few questions of
your own perhaps we try to keep
the conversation alive with me.
Let me add a few points if I can
You know the more twenty that
this is a this this is to Center
words point.
Yeah the you know for a favorite
quote the theme for today I told
you all I try to put some of
these things together the
to draw a little bit of stuff
discussion and debate the same
for today to me seems real curly
the old Mark Twain quote right
which is there are lies damn
lies and statistics right so a
lot of this is spent and those
of us that our lord particular
travelers get pretty good at
trying to figure out how to
spend statistics working with
experts and so forth so a lot of
this is just the the span of the
terminology Mr Brigman can you
hear my colleagues what they're
used to hearing the last two
years
usually presented by the AOC
is that of people that are
released on pre trial detention
less than five percent of them
re offend a violent offense
that's the statistic to look at
my colleagues are online it's
that's the numbers we here and
you're telling me that number is
closer to fifty percent and here
it yeah I can I think I can
reconcile and spend.
Senator Wirth the the reason
that we have different data or
different statistics frankly
we're we users there's
independent groups given the
fact that five percent number.
The travelers that we are well
who is that independent groups
who gave us that number that's
the UNM study I think this team
is could not be heard had to pay
for the UNM study.
Mr chairman I have no idea
anybody know.
The first question to ask is
when he got a study paid for by
well I challenge those the
figure out to pay for this I
think I know the answer that I
think the AOC pay for right I
think the AOC rate you and M. to
study of of pre trial detention
system to the AOC is very
invested in and and very
defensive of and so why am I not
surprised that their number
might be five percent refund in
their very careful when they say
only five percent re offend
thank commit a violent crime you
pointed out though explanation
maybe what is a violent crime
and who decides what that is.
And then the point that I
usually push back on the AOC
limit to is let's let's be real
about that too we don't know how
many people went out to commit
another crime we only know those
who went out and committed the
crime about cost and got
arrested for right so that
number's gonna be artificially
small because we don't know what
other crimes they've committed
and didn't get caught for and it
might be far more than that so
these are how these numbers get
manipulated when people have an
agenda and and I
as I try to be a critical
thinker try to reconcile the
issues that are puzzling is why
we getting some completely
different a fifty percent number
from you Mr Bregman that point
say less than five percent how
we reconcile those with us
that's what we're having today
is here is to help us understand
that information better and
frankly to be able to present
the public in state meres
getting fun right and the press
press is pretty easy to spend on
most of the stuff too and and
again because we just treat
these things very superficially
that's that's not what we're
doing on this committee so I
hope that gives a some thought
about really what's going on
there.
Mr Chairman though you know you
said that you've got attorneys
in your office who are very
firmly convinced that we can do
pre trial presumptions
constitutionally no big surprise
anybody I'm repeating I've taken
the position that it's just
clearly unconstitutional to me
and you suggested there may be a
genuine difference of opinion
that was the purpose of today's
here
I'm I'm not convinced of
anything different after today's
hearing I think the attorneys or
tell you this can be done
concerts largest general
Uh we've got a Supreme Court
case that seems very clearly on
point and we for the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court
tell us.
Very carefully and appropriately
without giving an advisory
opinion what she might think
about this and so I'm guessing
the attorneys are telling you
this meeting cost usually
probably not UNM graduates.
I am.
Well I'm hoping to persuade you
a little bit today to district
attorney because again the
purpose of today's hearing was
to persuade me that I'm wrong
right and and the and I think
there are others who kind of
share my perspective up here and
looking at start I see it in
this sort of wake noddies and I
see Senator Wirth he's nodding
his head a little bit I see
center Moores and he's not.
But you know we can take a
survey we don't have a bill in
front of us but we're we may
have built in front of us the
session and we want to begin to
proces knowledgeably not in the
last days of the session on the
final panic but to really begin
to understand this and so I'm
I'm challenging everyone here
today persuade us that that I'm
wrong but the purpose of today's
hearing was to give everybody
the opportunity show me where
I'm wrong when the constitution
here and I we by the governor to
send a representative we
appreciate you being here
director and and again that's
not a criticism of you or
anybody but I'm certainly not
convinced it any differently
than I have been all along in
the worst we're describing pre
trial detention as the silver
bullet it's going to fall flat
and and we should be really
working on things I think you
and I would agree I am as
indignant as you are to
recommend about the problems
with crime in Albuquerque and I
again I appreciate the passion
that you are showing here your
statement for those of you that
joined us late where in the
country would this be acceptable
except in Albuquerque and I I
don't know of any place that it
should ever be acceptable
anywhere but I'm fine certainly
committed to use to not let it
be thank you need to be true in
Albuquerque thank you Mr chair
too often times the last several
years the legislature gets
blamed.
For all of us.
Popular thing.
Former Attorney General that it
repeatedly consistently former
distribute the this returning
that from time to time on these
are my friends is my colleagues
I like all of them but they were
they were fond of and and the
executive and others of leaving
the legislature for the problem
and we're the source of the
problem we have to do something
about it but it seems like it's
it's an easy out for a lot of
people that that we have to be
asking ourselves what's really
going on I'm gonna ask you the
question that I raise a bit ago
when you have when you have half
of your pre trial detention
motions being denied.
Is it because the judges that
are sitting on the bench our.
so inclined to not hold people
is it a political philosophy is
an ideology of the court and the
judges are sitting on the bench
I know you're gonna be reluctant
to criticize judges I get it I'm
a lawyer too we don't like doing
that but is it that or is it
because.
You need to hear this from me
and like I always have to hear
from me all the time especially
Mr Ludwig and others in my
office what happens is the
judges will tell us what they
feel and then want to be
critical of the district
attorney but I'll just tell you
what they say they say the
district attorney comes in
they're not prepared
that they're that they're they
don't have to write with this is
that they don't bring the law
enforcement officers they didn't
prepare them to do their job
well and that's whether judges
on grant that's what the judge
will say privately they don't to
say publicly.
And alone and and and private
leave the district but say the
judges are soft and the cops
will come in and say the judges
are soft and and everybody will
say all kinds of things to us
privately in I got to do
something that and so what I do
with this.
State publicly can do and so you
tell me how much of the
responsibility for all those pre
trial detention motions that do
not get granted how how much of
that can we do better with you
the district attorney and doing
more at the district attorney
level let me just ask question
that way thank you and and just
give me a minute to answer that
Mr Chairman so so the way to
answer that is to tell you that
once when I got in the first day
what I did was I am actually
trying and that's why we have
some of these numbers are ready
to really understand a top to
bottom review of our pre trial
detention motion the reason is
the type of cases that we file
why we're finding these
particulars why we're not maybe
they're too close the other
thing that's vitally important
is to make sure that our office
and by the way I have some
phenomenal career prosecutors in
my office so I want to say that
right off the top that I I I've
gotten to visit with just about
every lawyer in there and they
care they care about the
community they bust their tails
to try and and do the job the
best they can but yes we would I
can tell you right now the
certainly our office is not
perfect we make we make mistakes
we have in the past we continue
to learn and get better as I
drew my true whole is far as the
office of what kind of evidence
is being presented well that
needs to be continually reviewed
and looked at and in the best of
our ability given everything we
can to the point that we get
oftentimes from law enforcement
to try and establish that
obviously you've already had a
discussion last week apparently
on the article that I was not
privy to I'm sorry but based on
that
Mr chairman that is another area
that I think and I hope because
of your discussion that that
continues to be looked at and I
want to get involved part down
that but that's something that
really this would make a big
difference as well so regardless
of whether that and I've already
made my statement about rebuttal
presumption without that goes
forward I hope that you I can
continue to work with the
legislature never blamed anybody
in the legislature all I'm doing
is asking for help.
And that's why I'm coming up to
in fact the same this that's
finally you madam mention the
judges that you know you could
look at the statistics you can
keep track of various judges on
is more inclined if you will to
but I think every case has to be
analyzed on its own we want
every judge to
they under they feel the crime
problem just like we all do in
Albuquerque right now they're
sensitive to that so I don't I
might might it's not that I
don't want to blame judges I
don't I don't feel the need that
that goes anywhere moves the
needle as long as the process is
is is working better and that's
what I'm asking the legislature
to help us with this the process
so I hope I've answered your
question he just asked me but
yes we can do better the DA's
office we can always do better
the DA's office and there's a
fresh set of eyes now looking at
this in the DA's office and I
hope to improve all of our
systems to make sure we're
serving the people best we
possibly can and making
Albuquerque a safer place I
appreciate that and and you know
you're asking for help we we
stand at the ready what we want
to know what is really going to
help and not what will drive
headlines OPM's FNX hello and
please and of when we know we
when we gather the information
with people talk with me
privately one of the criticisms
has been that the district
attorney's office of early
accounting charges or three pre
trial detention motions on to
any cases another with the
numbers that they do it almost
as a matter of routine in all
cases and if we think about a
critically a little bit
ourselves it's easy to
understand why that would be
done right if the DA's office
asked for pre trial detention in
all cases then of an individual
is the night pre trial detention
goes out commits a crime the
district attorney as a political
animal gonna talk about you in
the abstract not you personally
but in the abstract district
attorney could say I asked for
the pre trial detention.
this person on the terrible
thing and I get to wash my hands
of it because ask for pre trial
detention the judge and give it
to me so it's cover it's a see
YA maneuver and so the district
attorney will ask for that in
all cases and if that's the case
then you're going to lose a lot
of those motions
and I want you aware of that at
least as an issue in my mind
right which is if you're you're
asking for this in every case
just to see YA then maybe
there's not a full commitment to
coming in prepared for every
hearing and really committed to
having to tension everyone of
these and maybe there needs to
be a little bit better triage or
case selection for these motions
and you might get that that
percentage much higher really
focus on those on those a series
of violent crime so I'm making a
statement of asking a question
all of for you talk to be
because we could we we have some
of bills to hear I want to hit
and run with you but okay but
but but what I.
The
New Mexico and I think it's no
that's not that's not that's not
that's not the way I want to do
my job but what I want to do is
you're you're saying you want us
to help you in a and I want to
know what it is we do to help
you the the the other challenge
that we we run into we're going
to have a hearing on this issue
and this committee is where it
is our responsibility begin and
we're supports responsibility
begin and because you were not
here for the Arnold presentation
let's remind ourselves the
article is not a creation of
this legislature urine tool is
not a matter statute we did not
enacted we do not pass it is not
a state law is a creature of the
Courts need the courts have
created the Arnold tool to point
of created the procedure and we
have to ask ourselves if we pass
certain statutory of language
and there's a bill in the
session I think to address the
on screen are we infringing on
the court's Authority if we're
start telling how to do the R.
L. tool in Alice's when we're
not going to created in the
first place stated right so
where does our authority begin
and that's not a bright line for
the nonpartisan group we're
we're we're the court procedures
begin and where our authority
begins and ends is it's not
clear to me so I hope you'll
tell me when you when you say to
them I'm here to ask for our
help what you want.
Well.
You go through some of the
legislation the have now going
on right now I could tell you
which ones are good which ones I
don't feel that necessary but I
mean I I this isn't the this is
the setting for that what what I
I think I made clear my position
on rebuttable presumption when
it comes attention that the
topic the headline of this was
detention in presumption so I
hope I addressed some of those
issues I think I did but we we
we we want to help with
everything we do over there and
we were only gonna succeed
obviously if for working it in
every way possible to give you
all the necessary information
you have to make the decisions
that you should the one thing
I'm taking away from this is I'm
going to immediately have and
whoever I need to reach out to
to get my office working
together to make sure you
awesome clear numbers because
what we're seeing apparently is
different than yours and my
numbers are accurate I think it
reflects the bigger picture as a
whole in Albuquerque but the
problem we have and I think my
numbers are accurate so with
that said I'm happy to work with
you and I will continue to let
I've never been bashful Mr
Chairman said I will continue to
let you know what I'm asking for
yeah thirty years a member Law
School not be back.
Some of those changes right
but I'll tell you to look at the
UNM study and we need to look at
the LFC study LFC that a pretty
good dive this last six eight
nine months ago that was frankly
critical of I think even the UNM
and the AOC'S analysis so we've
got our own analysis and
statistics so let's put it all
together let's figure out maybe
what we're really at and I I
asked that last question my
phone my door and I think
everybody in this committee the
entire legislature's vote do we
want this problem solved
the the topic today as to what
we need to do for you he says a
long list so I'm looking forward
to hearing the whole list the
topic today was given me
rebuttable presumptions my
position on that's pretty clear
but I'm one of and and maybe for
good others of the committee
that that I'm wrong and that you
can do so constitutionally but
give me some constitutional
solution of that magnitude
center I'm is that if you have
some.
But just up.
Very quickly Senator one of the
lives of the points on you know
I I do I do with the frustration
with the professions completely
rational I also question.
And and I think the the lines
the constitution is this clear.
And and.
Senator I and analyze the same
with the chairman of this
committee does.
The.
So you.
I analyze that in the same way
that the chairman of this
committee does.
not cease rate of descent
analyst way this case of the
probably just the you know
I guess one of the things that I
would just also say as a general
statement is that oftentimes in
terms of.
People come the Legislature of
things.
We're told do this and it will
fix the problem.
many years ago
the police officers of the dust
came to this.
committee and said so when we
arrest someone for D. W. why the
problem is that you have defense
attorneys argue in relation
back.
And we just didn't have to deal
with relation back.
Then we could.
Get more convictions.
And this legislature's that well
if that's what you need to get
more convictions.
Then it creates a fiction in
terms of a scientific scenario
but will give you three hours.
And no relation back.
there's been no change in DWI
convictions.
All the while we have abrogated
people's rights before the
court.
Up you know folks came to us and
and and did you know there are
there are other situations I can
I can actually have the time I
would go down three or four
other situations where where
folks come to us is that if you
just.
Make these changes.
then we'll be able to fulfill
our responsibilities and the
reality is.
the constitution is an asset not
an obstacle.
It is part of what protects all
of us.
And
And and you know it.
while while well I agree
completely with the frustration
I I do think.
That there needs to be.
Perhaps some discerning about
which cases to ask for
Yes for preventive detention on
Mr Chairman you'll you'll recall
back in the day when we were
prosecutors.
You may have just left at that
time but one of the dust had a
policy that on any felony drug
charge we always ask for fifty
thousand dollar.
Cashpoint.
And because we always ask for it
on every single one of those
cases how persuasive where we
with the judges.
Not all.
Tell I okay and that's nice
moving on.
Right and and so you know that's
where that's where I mean I do
think
that there's still some work to
be done I I do think this
training needs to happen with
the judges.
On on on a lot of these and I
think that there is that there
are places that is not captured
by the oral pool.
That are legitimate discussions.
At these detention hearings to
raise.
But you have to have someone
who's thought that process
through it has made the
argument.
You know and so it is
you know but I Europe
Representative Hochman Vigil
does have a.
A bill that deals with.
Someone who is out on conditions
of release who commits a new
crime.
I think that's a different
matter.
as to the initial underlying
power of the first page right he
still apply the R. two on
senator Senator played on the
first Rachel read that once.
And so and so that's a place
where we can I think to a lot.
To address the perception of
this revolving door
Representative people get
arrested released rest of
release rested for lease you
know and and and particularly
and we've asked for the for the.
For the data of how many people
are restaurant crime.
while out on release for
existing private and we've got a
show that we can get that data.
but but you know what is clear
is that the majority of all the
crimes are being committed by a
very small number.
Yeah and if we can start.
All the people for violations of
conditions of release.
Then then you you stop a lot of
that cycle.
And and I think that is that is
a place that I think we really
need to be focused on because
those people were not listening
not only to the general society
they're not listen to loss as
laid down by the court.
You know so so but anyways I
just you know
well there's a lot of desire
for.
Find a C. as is you know a lot
of this is just simply select.
That's one reason why Leger that
position.
Because because
Actually covered what I just
that I don't think I've ever see
you sweat but you worked your
**** off.
Right you just keep up.
And and so and so that's part of
what we need is to.
Double down and change the
culture thank.
Thank you Mr.
So it is.
The.
Read about the time that we
allow for the hearing house.
Thank you for thank you Mr
chairman.
You're pretty good.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members thank you.
The.
We have.
Five thirty.
About the.
Popping.
There's always.
R. for.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman can we
just seventeen minutes.
Okay.
Okay cool all right thank you Mr
chairman members Senate bill
twenty nine repeals existing
statute governing the state
system of medical and geriatric
parole which parole board is
primarily responsible for
determining whether an inmate is
eligible for the program and
replaces it with a new system of
medical and geriatric for all
the transfers much of the
authority to the corrections
department of course still
involves the role of the parole
board with that basically this
bill had should be familiar to a
lot of you Torrez by the by the
courts and corrections Committee
but importantly this comes out
of a unanimous can a supporter
of the sentencing commission
involving both
victims dust Vic victims rights
groups public defenders etcetera
and
It's it's just it's just
something that you know what
what when I realized when I see
that it's like embraced by so
many different stakeholders in
our criminal justice system I
get excited in which we could do
that with other bills but having
said that I'm gonna turn it over
to a Douglas carver with the
sentencing commission and he can
briefly summarize this bill
thank you for your.
Doing history related to the
bill us the last two years ago
it was on the house floor ready
to be called up and then there
was a provided action to roll it
into the ex felons voting Gail
Chasey is built to to have the
exponents vote immediately upon
release so it basically got it
just didn't get it just got real
complicated and and it didn't
pass as a result it kind of blew
up the house at that time.
So this time I'm going to be
really clear like more keeping
it intact and not going to muddy
the waters so to speak.
Yes.
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Douglas
carver and deputy director of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission as Senator o'neill
said that this bill was
unanimously endorsed by the
sentencing commission again it's
the same bill Mr chair that this
committee saw in twenty twenty
one it's just the sections have
been re ordered to make the bill
read more
more easily so you can see
exactly what's happening but
it's the same bill word for word
a past six zero one of this
Committee Mr chair and it
they're only four votes against
on in the Senate
Mr chair
in twenty twenty one just to
give a little more detail to the
history the bill was drafted in
conjunction with the corrections
department and the the head of
the probation parole board
eight mostly reflects procedures
that are already in place with
the corrections department.
It is thought by the commission
and the department that it was
important to get many of those
procedures in place in statute
there's two places in our law
that discusses medical in
geriatric parole
that's why there's one repeal
section in there we wanted to
put everything into one section
of wall but we carry over some
of the processes that are
already in statute and like I
said we've put in statute
processes that already exist Mr
chair I know you're pressed for
time I'm happy to go into the
mechanics are details of the
bill but professions now.
give your interest thank you Mr
chairman all of the
species for that.
It is the opposition.
Or so
hello I will send ACLU first
reading the job sector in those
days
In that order please one of
each.
We have an issue here.
chairman and members of the
committee many missed and I love
the feeling of New Mexico in the
state strong support of this
bill and thank the sponsors in
the sentencing commission for
for their effort this is a
really important change that
will bring New Mexico in line
with what a lot of other states
already done I do hope so that
after taking this first step
this body will consider
extending eligibility for
medical injury out to pro for
those who are serving life
sentences in order to more
meaningfully address aging and
dying in our prisons I see in
the work that I do a lot of
people who are condemned to die
in prison with no eligibility
for for release under our
medical injury after school I
know that this isn't a time and
place you and talk to the
Sanchez and the sentencing
commission about it but and the
ACLU continues to to provide
strong support for this first
step in first really important
step in addressing aging and
dying in prison so thank you
both so much.
Thank you very much I don't see
Rikki Lee Chavez in the room is
Hannah Burley in the.
All right and there's no one
signed up in opposition so.
Questions from the committee for
functioning as a subcommittee
right now the court the.
We did have.
Hello of course right.
Well here do nothing for.
All rights well.
Senator more here this.
Chair of course my chair.
In the.
What I want.
All right.
No has your day been.
Shown here.
The committee talking
about the.
For some legislative processes.
Sure it's for all users to help
us okay right Law School one for
law school so we'll try to
square one that the state is
also that's what yeah.
Mr chair that was of course of
course.
Well as.
Mr Chairman a motion pending of
special from the committee.
I know you're on the bill so I
decided.
Yeah I heard the tail and I want
to go train track one of two
more down I I neglected she's
left but I'll try to get back
into the the law schools also
two zero I was pleased to see
her here for the of them
that should thank her for making
opportunity available to your
internet back up and use of this
includes services in the front
rows of.
Of our rate is to these the
majority of up law school maybe
right this is the center of the.
Secretary lost was also was
fired one of my best friends of
school graduated together and
she was on our committee staff
on the on the house Judiciary
Committee I think it was
For maybe one or two sessions we
need to give us time to so will
I guess we're not able to really
put together points of.
One two three four five.
So Senator or make a motion for
our.
Committed to pass.
Okay the roll call but please.
Let me ask this at any objection
to the motion.
This so Senator Moores is
objecting otherwise you have in
the past.
Okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair Mister
other schools still running
support.
Some of these so okay we can do
forty three forty three.
We need to perform.
Forty three intimidation of
election officials.
You would please Senator would
you remind us the history of
this just confirm that we passes
before.
Absolutely Mr chair so this is a
bill that was passed unanimously
both by this committee last year
and by the Senate as a whole and
once I got over to the house
that.
Kind of evolved into something
else but in the in the same.
Important that you see it here
in front of us today it passed
this committee and the house
unanimously.
Yeah we are sent to the thing
that that is built our house
killed the bill with them to
build.
The house killed this bill last
year but the someone but.
we have
Miss bargain with you as of
expert and then we have.
Register just because
proponents.
Mason Graham Deborah Condit
Kathryn Clark and Amanda Lopez
so they're being this is this
bill is passed estimating for
without opposition yes Mr so
we've is is there anyone here
today in the audience here to be
heard in opposition.
Right so that nobody registered
advantage no one in the audience
opposition we'll hear from the
proponents because you give us
your time but please keep up the
economic or less so so if.
We are you we do have one don't
need to say thank you look at me
say something if you want me to
I wasn't sure if you were
Senator addressing the office I
mean the audience but I'm happy
to give the secretary's position
on the bill
So I'm extreme harassment and
intimidation of government
election officials has been
documented in many states
including Georgia Michigan and
Arizona and Nevada and certainly
this was public so not
disclosing the secretaries
private story here but she
personally experienced extreme
harassment and intimidation in
twenty twenty when her picture
was featured needs a gun scope
on a website labeled enemy of
the people along with a picture
of her home with a home address
this was in addition to
threatening phone calls that
have been received by the sos
office as well as county clerk
offices throughout the state the
secretary has prioritize this
piece of legislation this
session and would love to pass.
Before we go to the other
proponents whose names I read
when we go I want to thank you
again for coming back into the
law school back in the room for
just a bit you may have missed
the presentations are Moores got
somebody here Representative
maybe look at it but can you Law
School the the fact that
facility of your discussion on
that regard yes Representative
we have a meeting with the
secretary who mother was one of
my Law School of close friends
we graduated together his father
was a Senator and a graduate of
the unimodular of you to have a
great university.
What university.
Yeah well.
So the.
Montoya is with us and I have to
come back and you just rise and
and so we can introduce you to
I'm following of I guess
introduce a many times before
including dinner first female
the
second the.
And the only job I you're not
right the placenta yet so thank
you for being here I hope you
were impressed by some of the
graduates of you and I'm also
and and saw yes I was
there to.
There are a lot of thank you
thank you are
Mason Graham Deborah Condit
Kevin Clark please line up
Amanda Lopez please line up and
get ready for about a minute
please.
Yes
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Mason
Graham I am the policy director
for common cause New Mexico I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward
kamikaz runs an election
protection program every
election cycle we actually run
in in all the states in which we
have a chapter we have one in
New Mexico did one during this a
primary General flexion so we
definitely importance of this we
have our volunteers out there
who are observing and reporting
on what's happening at the polls
and with the recent violence of
course we know that
political violence is at an all
time high so we definitely
appreciate the amendments
brought forth by Senator Duhigg
we had for the past thank you.
Your bill's here now over here.
Share this.
Just to say that all with a
minute.
SysML.
Total workers.
We've had a it from our side due
to the COVID in this bill with
the some sections of the place.
And
and then the slope of the quick
because we're gonna lose our
important for sure hello and
gentleman committee and my name
is Katherine Clark in the Santa
Fe county clerk I did want to
give a copy of that the
affiliate has remained neutral
on this bill however me
personally before I even took
office when I was wearing and a
vehicle followed me and I had to
do a very mission possible
maneuver to catch them their
license plate and we discover
that it was someone who was no
election and I are following me
the FBI recommended that I not
take the same at home if I felt
like there was threats to our
email which we've seen often and
I do have poll workers that have
been followed within three
inches of the bumper as they're
driving home trying to bring the
ballots home to our office who
have been subsequently quit and
refuse to continue so this is
extremely important bill and I
hope we will get a pass today
thank you so much.
Mr chairman committee Amanda
Lopez us doing and county clerk
speaking on behalf of my County
I supported this last year and I
think Senator Duhigg for
continuing to champion this I
could go into the details back
into twenty and back in the
twenty eighteen of the threats
harassment and intimidation that
I personally received part of
what I'm so excited about for
this one is that it encompasses
more individuals and so we're
hoping what that means is that
it is not just the details of
what encompasses but also it's a
show of support from you all
connected to election officials
so I hope you pass this and
thank you very much budget
committee discussed the motion
of the one seventy where do
passed very objection the
members of the committee there
being no you have you have.
The.
I'm sorry Senator forty three
yes.
Mr chair I don't see some
results do you want me to go
ahead with.
Seoul to make a decision role is
over the next meeting I don't
think we're gonna read three of
the cost to the form of so we
can we.
Bill factor is involved in that.
The
number
of the school they would
have sent.
Thank you Mr chair this is a
Senate bill thirty one overall
this is a.
Most of what this bill is doing
is simply.
Moving some language that allows
folks to get federal subsidies
from one part of statute into
another part because it was put
in the wrong part originally I
have here with me chief judge
Marie ward from second judicial
district and judge Jane levy
from the fair a family court
judge in the second judicial
district and also Emily Martin
from CYFD and merry McQueen also
from CYFD.
I can go into the the details of
the bill a bit but Townsend let
me know how how quickly you'd
like me to go Mr chair.
We don't have the.
Looking at the register.
Speakers so.
Four of them by accident
proponents.
Those in the.
I need to.
That are about this is that a
pretty simple straightforward
bill
Alvarado.
But I see some opposition
presses Spence and
It is very important for the
Designed to retain its
They will.
The.
Not able to
use that.
All of the.
For more information.
So Mister chairman why is
particularly important today you
have any idea two very good idea
You'll like to but we we have
members who were having their
bills presented all other
committees and their their
sponsorship as a priority I
think understand that actually
Sanchez wired for the committee
purposes others ivory purposely
take very few bills so that I
can put my attention working
with this committee but a lot of
members on this we are carrying
a lot of bills chairman you made
every one of those men over
there all four of them have a
fill in coach back as the
Senator Ivey Soto that's really
the only other Senate committee
meeting right now I believe that
they're worth the than actually
centers of us as for the
Republican members I don't know.
Participate in the mail due to
work with.
It comes at a work of so your
respect right yes yeah and I
think that's where some photos
yeah Senator recessing that with
over track the state so other
than I really.
Republicans Representative.
but we're having a little
trouble the requirement that we
have about thank so we we can I
think proceed with with the
bills before I do that.
Of.
Senator tickets profitability
thank you a lot of changes.
Make it simple for us we're not
going to hear from of both the
judges both of the two
presenters for C. wife of all of
the other part of.
Mr chair those proponents were
never going to give public
comment that's my understanding
I have a list to they are so we
have proponents of this bill
addresses Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty children's court
judge of ciation as you can
capital Montoya New Mexico's
reports family members impatient
Commission Federal Jimenez
retires port
Caroline holiday for futures
judge Katherine B. gays second
judicial district Jones
Christina river illicit deal
sorry budget that right along
with the center long poverty and
Schneider and make a this is the
whole futures as proponents of
the proponents low Lawrence on
children's forty proving
Commission a faster track
Representative is front those
reports on on your experts as
far as you know I to judges and
so.
Senator only got a few to decide
we speak and for how long but I
don't want to one of the
estimates presented a bill all
right absolutely Mr chair thank
I think I'll just give a brief
overview and then I will be
available to answer questions
from the committee also in
twenty twenty this body passed a
bill that would allow for for
our federal subsidies for
kinship guardianships they put
it in the kinship guardianship
section of on our statutes and
on it doesn't work there in
order to meet federal guidelines
to get access those subsidies
CYFD has to have actual legal
custody of a child in order time
to get back and so is this is
moving that section into the
children's code so that CYFD can
have that legal custody so that
folks can can get access to the
subsidies.
that's that's the biggest thing
that the status on some of the
other things that it does is it
also
If we're so voluntary placement
agreements is is where that's
going to live now so to clarify
some of the timelines
confidentiality and notice
requirements around the PA's
voluntary placement agreements
it also creates protections for
parents to than these voluntary
placement agreements this is
when someone is voluntarily
agreeing to have less CYFD have
cut have legal custody of the
child and usually there's a
place in which Graham all plays
with someone else this is not
once a child is being removed
let's say under at this neglect
proceeding on so we've also
created protections for parents
they will they'll have access to
counsel prior to executing one
of these BPA is on and we also
have it so that I G. A. L. will
be appointed for the child and
issue
And.
That's really the biggest of and
then the other changes that are
made in here are here we passed
if possible last year so there's
changes that are being made just
to a line of more of the
language on children's code with
it language off adopted if
passed.
And so that's where the
definition of a kinship Gartner
fictive kin comes from in a
couple of the other changes that
are and then we do have a
committee sub
that I believe.
Thank you all yes you could pass
that up thank you
all that committees of is doing
as there were there were some
some good points raised in the
FIR so it's addressing those
it's really not changing the
substance of the bill the
overall if you like I can go
through the changes that are on
the committee some
But that's.
Kind of the shortened early on
this bill.
One thing that we will an
oversight on my part Mr chair is
that you'll see so much
committees I believe it section
twenty two ads a purpose
provision that that we as a as a
committee strike in every other
bill I I should have.
Follow that approach in the
initial drafting of the bill and
I apologize for that but we can
strike back now today section
four also addresses exist it
amended existing purpose
provision within the children's
code
I believe it's your preference
Mr chair that we just do an
amendment striking that section
in general which would remove
the purpose for vision overall
hi as I mentioned it'll it'll
cost me consistency within our
children's could because there's
a whole lot of purpose purpose
provisions in there otherwise
but I know that is the approach
of this committee overall that
we are removing those as we come
across them my best.
So I would.
I have a so.
Yes
Chair of the solution we want to
use those loans.
Sure so I guess first I would
move the committees move the
committee stuff for the purposes
of discussion
And if that's okay
and then the first amendment
would be to strike section
twenty two from the sob.
And I'm sorry that is on page
forty two striking lines three
three twenty five.
And forty three striking lines
one into.
We have a copy of this monitor
which accepting I'm from
therapeutic I don't think
there's anything in writing on
the Senator from the worlds of
yeah members to this and and I'm
just the Sanchez issues agree
with that come back to the.
In the.
Cleans up the committee so so
the the motion for the buyer has
to strike session to which is on
the board for this is taking up
the school system practices
committee for.
The judge of disruption within
the state of.
Dont do.
So then we would be striking
section four or which begins on
page twelve lines twenty four
twenty five and continues on to
page thirteen lines one through
thirteen.
Sure on page twelve striking
lines twenty four twenty five on
page thirteen striking lines one
through thirteen.
Mr chair.
It's also quite striking this
from the bill it's still going
to be the other one all so there
is another Mr chair Senator all
have a third amendment which
will be just to strike NMSA
thirty two a dash three eight
dash one in general.
So when you get the order back
it'll be striking that
completely.
So it'll be a repeal that.
Our test a repeal of that
section thank you.
Legislative session for rate
from the.
Discussion.
Questions.
The adoption Sanchez.
Same amendment that
Well.
Through
for that my that my final for
the moment would be to repeal
NMSA thirty two eight dash three
eight dash one.
Which will be reflected in the
the news on his web page fifty
five of the look at page of
thirteen so it's the same thing
that we just struck that section
for that family whatever the
existing language would be are
left in their it's it's just a
purpose statement.
Mr chair that's kind of age
fifty five.
The deal with with the idea.
Process.
Yes I think that that makes
sense.
That section yeah.
Session of.
The objections Dr.
The.
so.
I know we're ready for questions
from the committee.
Mr chairman I would like to hear
from the judges that are here.
Very long but I would like to
hear from.
The court.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Stewart it's my pleasure to be
here today my name's Marie board
I'm the chief judge of the
second judicial District Court
I started out on the the bench
is a family court hearing
officer since two thousand seven
to my appointment to the
children's court two thousand
fourteen I am the co chair along
with my wonderful put your
nervous Sanchez of the chill
Department prove my commission
what I would like to say I think
Senator Duhigg didn't excellent
job and and saying this is
really a cleanup bill moving
things to the appropriate
provisions moving CYFD
obligations from chapter forty
which is typically overseen by
the family court judges.
And two thirty two a which is
overseen by children for judges
it's most appropriate in the
children's code.
what I would also just say is I
think
You've gotten it information
from the tennis court judges
association that they've
approved this movie for
decisions court permit
commission this is a bill that
was approved by the commission
members not to move forward the
children percent commission for
those that do not now is a
member of the forty three member
board of multi disciplinary team
members that practice in child
welfare this is their specialty
and they take this work very
very seriously this was a lot of
work that went into making sure
that we were reorganizing this
so it made more sense that we
were aligning definitions so
that they were similar across
the the children's code
that went with the
implementation of if that we
make sure that the definitions
if I were consistent with the
rest of the children.
I appreciate your consideration
this bill and and pass.
I'm Jane levy and then the
presiding judge and family court
in the second and I this is my
boss sitting next to me
So I am the chair of the
domestic relations rules
committee and picked Committee
as presiding family court judge
we work primarily with the the
kids ready to back and the
insertion of voluntary placement
agreement subsidies into that
act because some publications
and for that actively use so
we're really pleased with the
changes to move that for someone
to code and also improvements to
hack.
Including the inclusion have the
if that to the contrary to fact
because we didn't have any
reference to that and if they
didn't specifically cover
kinship guardians said this is
going to be and if it's approved
because a lot of this is going
to be at a big improvement to an
existing statute thank you.
So also we're gonna I.
The Martin and there.
Where
we have just one of the rest.
Sure.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Emily
Martin I am the director of the
protective services division at
CYFD we as well are members of
the children's court and
improvement commission and have
worked tirelessly over time with
this multi disciplinary team to
ensure that the code and and
families this is a tool that we
have to support families that is
not through abuse and neglect
proceedings but through other
types of support and very much
are and are in support of this
bill thank you.
we've gone through the experts
in the office for a little bit
of.
There are two registered on and
on.
Have questions so right correct
so we need.
As long as you're looking to
move.
I thank you so much members of
the committee I will if it's if
I'm understanding correctly they
have just proposed to amend and
strike up Page four lines twenty
four twenty five is that
correct.
Mr chair.
One of the phone.
Okay sorry I wanted to make sure
I was understanding correctly
my only concern with this bill
are my biggest concern is the
new definition of a fictive kin
my biggest concern is that I
feel that we are removing a
large group of people who would
potentially be stable placement
options as well as stable
reliable
familiar familial resources for
children in care I believe in
twenty twenty there is one
thousand one hundred and eighty
four children who came into care
of which eighty for those
children were transition out of
care and came back in within
twelve month period of time and
a hundred thirty seven of them
transition out of care and came
back into care after twelve
month period of time my concern
is that changing the definition
of significant to only include
people who the child is known
prior to entering foster care
will remove any foster parents
with home those children have
resided.
After having entertainer and for
a lot of children.
Those are the only that's the
only stability that they've had
in their lives is that period of
time that they were response to
homes so I urge you to please
reconsider that portion of that
definition where it says prior
to entering.
So David Simmons on.
The other day I.
I.
Correct.
Are we also have Lucas Frank no
position there.
Right yes.
Mr Chairman
my name is just we recognize
that two minutes.
Thank you a please committee my
name's Lucas Frank common
attorney in Albuquerque New
Mexico and and foster parents I
share the same concern and
submitted a proposed amendment
to the committee if you just
look at that page five to talk
about fictive kin it's at line
twenty to twenty five the first
part says who's not who is
detective can means a person who
is not a relative or an extended
family member of a child into as
a significant family like
relationship with the child or
the child's family which is
relationship which relationship
existed prior to the child entry
into foster care if you just put
a period before page and delete
the rest and do that throughout
I think that's that's what we're
asking for and here's why it's
important there are sections of
if that talk about what happens
when a child comes in to get
back into care which is thirty
two eight excuse me thirty two
eight dash twenty eight that's
twelve.
And they talk about order and
who should be considered when a
child comes back into care if
you if you don't delete this
language it makes it harder to
place that kid comes back into
care with a loving foster family
they had before there's just no
reason to do that in in its
budget change that I think it
was a mistake and I can be
corrected by doing this and I've
submitted my and then I
appreciate your time that's all.
The six of us the state of the
opposition Representative
masters.
On suggestions or concerns.
Chair Mister chair and all of
all defer to us it chief judge
for.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Duhigg the so first of all I'd
like to say that
our system of trouble for system
cannot function without the
wonderful
foster parents resource parents
that open their hearts and their
homes to children
that are in our become involved
in our system I also think it's
really important to note that
fictive kin
is it an evaluation that the
court makes
case by case on a factual basis
it's fact driven to the
specifics of the family I can't
say that this this definition
came over and this workgroup as
an opportunity to provide
consistency throughout the
children's code I think that is
is critically important and so
the committee members look to if
I just that was important piece
of legislation that had most
recently passed under the
examples that have been provided
by this Lujan
there's nothing about that
example of somebody that's re
entering
foster care that the individual
involved would be considered
potentially infective can't the
court's going to analyze that
based on the relationship and so
just as a teacher might be found
to be effective can
a foster parent could be found
to be effective can but it's not
necessarily that they'll be
found fictive kin by virtue of
their status in that position
and so again this just provides
consistency I don't think it's
ours a foster parent from being
determined by a court in the
right circumstances that they
are effective can.
And Mr chair if I may I I think
the distinction as this is
insane before the trials.
First I entry into foster care
it's it's talking about that
specific placement for the
current place so if they were
had been previously played for
the foster family and that's the
most appropriate family to be
considered affective can they
could absolutely be effective
can under this language.
The question.
But all the as we discussed in
the.
Are you saying that we have a
former president
rises a Lexus and Senator with
the claim these other things
that Representative what that
substance reflected surface
passing bills subject to you
have that so I see no questions
of the committee was supposed
Senator.
Mr chairman of a do not pass the
Senate bill thirty one and then
pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty one with the
amendments offered by the chair
so expect a sandy eight point
three version Representative.
Are there any other questions or
discussion on.
There's a motion for commission
objections adoption the motion
do past center.
Right so if the business the
