Because of another committee
engagement and because there's a
number of people that are here.
For Senate Bill 73. So Senator
Woods, we'll get to you here in
a little bit shortly. And uh and
center too and so just both of
you all know too, I deplore
having to have people sit in
committees if they don't want to
be and have other better things
to do, so you all are welcome to
join us and enjoy the day with
us, but if you want us to call
you from your office, so we will
do that too, and you won't miss,
you won't miss a beat, so.
I, I don't know, are you all in
finance?
Yeah, you're welcome to be over
in Finance Center Woods, and
we'll go get you.
Well, yeah, and, and, you know,
you guys aren't gonna get up any
earlier than you have to over
there, so, uh,
all right,
we were happy to have you join
us today, but, but we'll go get
you too if you, if you have
something else to go do soen Cio
Lopez on Senate Bill 73.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm here with a bill that is all
about enhancing safety for all
bicyclists. I know this is a
little counterintuitive for
non-bicyclists, but when you are
riding a bike and you come to a
stop sign and there are no cars,
no bikes, no pedestrians.
And I'll just share, I do it.
You keep going without a full
stop.
And uh and the reason for that
is because you, I want to carry
your momentum on the bike, and
then I'll just share with you
cause I'm getting older, um,
that pressure, that constant
pressure of the stop on your
ankle is actually not good for
your, um, you know, it's not
good for aging ankles, um, and,
and, but the more important
thing is this has been passed in
other states and it's reduced
bicycle fatalities.
Um, so, and, and what the bill
does is it just it when it drops
what is called the Idaho stop.
That is if you come to a red
light, you stop, and of course
yield to any traffic, but if
there is no traffic, then you
go, and this is really important
because it gets you out of the
blind spot of the cars who have
stopped. Um, but I would like to
introduce my expert Eric
Beiderman, who knows just about
everything there is to know
about, about this issue around
the country.
OK. Thank you, Senator, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, my name is Eric Beiderman.
I'm here representing an
alliance of bike advocacy
organizations that include
Velorus like Santa Fe and Bike
ABQ I bicycle as my primary
transportation. I also do it for
recreation, but at the same
time, I'm also a car owner and
driver, so I use our road system
in multiple modes. I'm here
primarily to talk about the
safety aspects of this bill,
which are substantial, as
Senator Sadillo Lopez said,
being able to treat a stop sign
controlled intersection as a
yield.
And treat a traffic light
controlled intersection as a
stop.
Enhance the cyclist safety
because it reduces the cyclist's
exposure to cars, um, it
increases our visibility to
cars, you spend less time
waiting in blind spots, you're
at less risk of being right
hooked if a car doesn't see you
or the so called leftro from
oncoming traffic. There are a
number of ways in which being
able to proceed through an
intersection with a head start
before the cars move really
enhances cyclist safety. The
Department of Public Safety
report has looked at this. They
highlighted the safety benefits.
They also highlighted the
importance of
Properly judging the state of
traffic and really the same is
true of any road user in any
part of the road system, being
able to judge a state of traffic
is critical. What this law
allows cyclists to do is
exercise more of that judgment.
It frees those constraints so
they can choose the time to
cross the intersection that's
safest for them. And the numbers
bear this out on the state of
Idaho the year after they
implemented this, they saw 14.5%
reduction in cyclists' injuries
and fatalities. Delaware was the
next state to implement this
law. They saw 23%
production, the Department of
Transportation has looked at all
12 states plus District of
Columbia.
And I've implemented these laws
and in every state they've seen
statistically significant
reductions in the number of
collisions between cars and
cyclists and the injuries and
fatalities that result.
You wound up on a high point
too, so, do we have anybody
registered? We have nobody
registered in support or
opposition senators, so we'll go
to members of the committee with
questions.
Yeah, I'm sorry. Yeah.
register
Um, did you all want to speak?
Um, well, I'll recognize you all
for a minute. We have rules and
we need to, so for me to manage
the committee, I need to know
how many people are going to
speak and how long and take into
account all those kind of
things, so, um, because you've
been here a couple of days,
yeah, we'll I'll recognize each
of you for a minute if you'd
like to speak for a minute.
Judge Judge, you've been in my
office for the last 3 weeks,
you've had all the time in the
world to sign up.
I'm sorry that we didn't
register in the last movie they
asked the the people who were
here, who's here for and who's
here again. So my name is Lynn
Pickard. I am a retired court of
appeals judge. I have been a
recreational and commuter
cyclist.
Since before I got to New
Mexico, which was over 50 years
ago, and I am here representing
my club, the Santa Fe Seniors on
bikes, as well as the other
cycling advocacy clubs around
New Mexico. And I just wanted to
explain how this
counterintuitive bill actually
works. I rode my bike in here
today from Tasuki, and I
estimate that I spent about 1%
of my time, maybe 2% of my time
and mileage in intersections.
Yet the data shows that about
25 to 50% of collisions, cars
and bikes occur within
intersections. So anything we
can do to get cyclists into and
out of the intersections
quickly, leaving, of course, for
us to determine our own safety
if there are other cars there or
pedestrians there, would be
really helpful for us. So I hope
that you support this bill.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much.
Cervantes community members. My
name is Alex Applegate, and 2
days ago, I was almost hit by a
vehicle at an intersection.
Um, this is not surprising to me
because the University of
Toronto study found that 58% of
drivers do not look for or see.
Cyclist and pedestrians at
intersection.
Um, this also goes along with my
30 years of experience where I
have been hit twice at
intersections and have had.
numerous encounters to count,
after one such bad incident, I
started.
Uh, practicing the Idaho stop
and have found that the number
of incidents have been reduced
significantly, and I feel much
safer on the road, and I hope
that you give this a due pass so
that I can become the
law-abiding citizen I feel
myself to be. Thank you.
Thank you very much. All right,
now we'll go to members of the
committee. Question.
Questions to anyone at all,
comments? Senator Thornton,
uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Alex has come to my office and
told me about this, and I, uh,
at first thought it was very
counterintuitive, and I said,
you know, this is crazy, why are
we allowing people to go
through, um.
However, having.
Experience something like that
similar to my, in, uh, when I
was at Stanford, I was, I was
riding my bike in Mountain View.
And I was just, and they have a
little bike path on the road,
and as I it's going along, um,
car passed me, and then
immediately made a left turn
right in front of me. So people
when they're driving aren't
necessary, and so I had to lay
the bike down basically to avoid
hitting, so I basically hit the
deck. So I've, I've experienced
that with it, and it's not a
driver, you're just not thinking
about the biker, you've gone
past that, there's a left turn,
you're gonna make a left turn,
not realizing I was just right
behind him.
So, so I understand the need for
this. It's not quite the same
incident, but uh.
So I'm gonna support this bill
because even though it's
counterintuitive, it does make
sense if you're a biker.
Thank you very much for bringing
this forward.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Lopez, gentlemen,
the uh
No excellent point. It seems
weird at first.
We're not gonna
We're gonna wave stop signs and
stuff, but it.
This actually, uh, this bill
came around about 10 years ago
and and I learned a lot about it
then I'm surprised it hasn't
passed now, but it's worked in
Iowa since.
Um, uh, Mr. Trimmer Lopez, when
did Iowa, Idaho pass this law.
Chairman, I'd like to, uh,
direct my expert, direct that
question to my expert.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Mata, the
answer is 1982.
So, Mr. Chairman, that this has
been around for shucks, over 40
years and
I'm surprised it hasn't kicked
kicked into all 50 states, but
bicyclists are have an excellent
view of the intersection, you
know, they're they're a good 6
to 8 ft, eye level, um,
They're not on their phones,
they're not touching their dial
their radio dial, they're not,
you know, reading the newspaper
they're.
And they're, there's a
self-interest involved that that
that kicks in, so this actually
will keep them safer so they can
roll through the intersection
instead of having to start and
stop, start and stop, start and
stop. Um, so I support it
wholeheartedly. Thank you. But
my question, Mr. Chairman, uh,
senator, gentlemen, is this
language the same as the Idaho
statute or is it written
differently?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Manta,
uh, this language is very close
to the Idaho law as it's
written.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I also
experienced
Uh, being hit on a bike and
waking up in an emergency room.
Uh, it's a super scary thing. In
fact, I didn't ride a road bike
for
30 plus years just because I
was, it just
You're so exposed. I mean, I
love to bike and mountain bike
all the time. Uh, so again, I
remember, I think uh Senator
Diego carried this Eric Griego
carried this bill years ago and
uh.
I supported it then and I'm
gonna support it now. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
So there's good sport, I think
you're gonna do fine, I'm gonna
be a no vote, I'll give you my
reasons, I think a little bit
when everybody says this is all
counterintuitive, sometimes our
intuition's a good thing and we
should rely on it. I know
there's an argument made that
the data supports this, but the
reality is the idea has been
around for decades as has been
pointed out here, and it hasn't
been adopted by most states and
the data was that compelling, I
would expect that most states
would do so. I, I've noted that
California vetoed the same bill,
and I read the veto message from
the governor where in
California, they found the
primary cause of collision.
was a failure to stop at a stop
sign between bicyclists and
vehicles and the and the data
California anyway was that
bicyclists were to be determined
at fault for 88% of the
collisions resulting in
fatalities and 63% of those
involving injuries. So the
California reached a different
result, I think, at least from
the veto message of Governor
Newsom at the time, um, and so,
you know, I, I understand that.
I think, I think the argument
would be made too, because the
arguments made, if this is good
for bicyclists, wouldn't this
also be good for motorcyclists?
Why wouldn't, why wouldn't
motorcycles have the same
consideration?
Um, because it's the same
issues, I think, right, for
motorcycle, so, um, so we're
gonna do that, but, but I'll
justultimately I'll tell you
the, the fundamental reason I
think this becomes a problem is
attitude.
Um
There's an attitude, uh,
dissimilarity between bicyclists
and motorists and um and I, and
I appreciate bicyclists. I'd
love to have more bike lanes,
I'd love to have more people
riding bicycles and so forth,
but I gotta tell you, my general
impression is, and it's, I'll be
candid myself too with the, with
all the affection for all of you
that ride bikes when, when I,
when I see bicyclists violating
the laws, which I see routinely,
you get a bad attitude, uh, as
a, as a motorist, why do they
get to seemingly defy
conventions and laws and so
forth I think.
that creates a bad will and bad
attitudes in our society in
general, when we see people who,
who defy the law, and I guess
the argument would be, well,
they wouldn't be defined the
law, we changed the law, but
I've got to tell you, most
motorists are not going to see
it that way. Uh, they're not
gonna see it all, the law allows
them to go through stop signs
and and red lights. Um, I think
the attitude's gonna be probably
a negative one, and I think that
that leads to bad, uh, attitudes
in, in our society and so I, I
think that there's some
negatives here, yet I, we'll,
we'll, if we pass it, we'll see
statistically what happens,
although.
It, uh, I was as a lawyer, one
of the things I do, I appreciate
the judge here too. Uh, we play
with statistics all the time, I
mean, I hire experts, say I hire
experts, and we all take the
same data and, and spin it in
our own ways and I see the judge
smiling cause she saw she saw
decades of this, and that's what
I do for a living, uh, and so
the old, what is it, uh, oh,
who's got the quote there's a
live
that's the one. lies, damn lies
and statistics and I'm, I do
this all day long, play with
statistics, so we'll find out
and I hope.
I hope you all are right that
that we pass this, that more
people will be safe and less
people harmed, so, um, anyone
else, comments or questions?
We'll uh just do a do pass and
those voting negatively by a
show of hands only, only me,
probably, I think, right? So.
Um, all others, I don't know
what you're doing, Senator
O'Malley. Is that a
Mr. Chair, I thought you had
asked for a motion.
I'm sorry?
I thought you had asked for a
motion, but you, you're doing
something different.
Thank you, do we not have a
motion? Yeah, you're right,
O'Malley, go for the motion.
I got
a step ahead of us pass. All
right, there you go.
All right, show all in voting in
the affirmative for a due pass
other than negative hands me,
that's it. You're due past it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Uh, we've been joined by a
number of you all, and so, like
I said, we're gonna do some of
these in Center Woods, hold on a
second, buddy. I'm sorry. Um,
let me.
I'm, I'm sorry to do that to
you, but uh as I mentioned to
everybody else, I'm gonna take
these in some order that I think
we cannot some of these out
quickly and.
Uh, some of the members were not
here earlier when, or maybe they
weren't, I didn't see him, but
uh senator, uh, let me do a
couple with Senator uh Trujillo,
because I think they're gonna be
pretty quick.
The Senate 179, Senator Rubio,
you weren't here, but I think
pretty quick, I think, right? Do
you have any opposition to this
bill?
Let's dosen at 179 real quickly,
please.
members for um.
present here today. I'll just be
really quick. We do have one
expert on Zoom if anybody has
any questions, but I do think
it's fairly straightforward. It
updates the New Mexico rental
Purchase Agreement Act to
include electronic disclosures
for requirements for rental
purchase agreement. The bill
mandates that when a consumer
enters into a rental purchase
agreement electronically,
regardless of where the consumer
views the property, the existing
disclosure requirements of the
Act may be met through
electronic means, as
As long as the required
information is displayed clearly
and conspicuously before the
agreement is finalized. So what
this does is right now when you
go into a rental furniture
store, for example.
And you are going to purchase
something, rent to own or just
to rent. Um, there's gonna be a
tag hanging from that furniture
and the tag is gonna say exactly
what these disclosures require.
So the act requires disclosure
of certain information, cost,
what the full cost would be, um,
what your payments are gonna be
when you do it electronically in
order to meet this current law,
you have to hang it on the
furniture.
a picture of it, and that is not
going to be displayed
conspicuously. And so what we
want is we want the language to
be not part of the picture of
the furniture hanging on the
furniture. We wanted to actually
be part of the sales agreement
that's right there where the,
the material is presented. So
with that, Mr. Chairman, we'll
stand for questions. We have
nobody registered. Am I right?
Nobody registered. Uh, we'll go
to members of the committee with
questions. Senate Bill 179.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I have never done that before. I
rented a furniture, but so, uh,
when you purchase it, you said
you've got the disclosure when
it's purchased, do you also?
Yet at this point, a paper, you
know, that, that shows all the,
all that information, that's,
that's required still as part of
Um, purchased, Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator, you could still print
that out after you. And yes,
that's still on, that's
something that is required. OK,
I, I just wanted to make sure it
was required because a lot of
folks still, especially older
folks, I have difficulty, right,
excellent, OK, I just wanted to
make sure that we're still part
of it. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you Senator O'Malley,
others questions
Senator with do pass motion.
Any other questions? Is there
any objection to the Du pass
motion on Senate 179 elect
electronic disclosure. Seeing
none, all members in support.
Senator you with two paths while
you're seated, set at 180,
self-service rental changes.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, so, um, I do
have uh
Here we go. Thank you. Um, I do
have an expert witness here with
me today. I think all of you
know, uh, Randy, uh, Senate Bill
180 makes several changes to the
statute. It allows occupants to
designate a third party. And
that's kind of important,
actually, because if you're
renting a storage unit and all
you give is your contact
information and let's say your
phone number gets disconnected
or you change your phone number
and you forget that you need to
update your phone number with.
A storage unit that has your
materials and somehow or another
you forget, believe you me, I
have forgotten to pay my storage
unit when I've been out of town
or when other things have
happened, i.e. being in the
legislative session and a bunch
of other things happening, and
you don't pay it and then your
your items can actually go into
hold and be sold, we want to
have the ability to have a third
party, so that that third party
can be noticed. Um, the changes
also uh go from a 90.
day to a 45 day, um, it
establishes a valuation limit,
and this was a little bit
challenging for me to
understand. Um, so I'm gonna let
my expert witness explain that,
but the storage units want to be
able to set a valuation you a
limit, so that, for example, um,
they're not storing, uh,
Breaking Bad money in a storage
unit and then they uh
confiscated and they sell it
off. In that case, they'd have
the money and they
responsible for a whole lot of
money. So the valuation limit is
actually beneficial for the
storage unit, and it also sets
some standards for what uh
should be stored in a storage
unit. Um, and then, uh, it
allows the owner to charge a
late fee of $20 a day or 20% of
monthly rent, whichever is
higher, um, and Mr. Chairman, I
would like to give my expert
witness an opportunity to speak.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Randy Trayer
representing the
Storage Association. um, this
feels a little bit like the
Groundhog Day. It's been around
a few years, um, and, uh,
typically what we have run into
uh the the most difficult thing
we've dealt with on this bill is
the issue of the notifications
and um the uh New Mexico Press
Association has um objected to
that for a number of years now
and so this year we got together
with him prior to the session,
we worked it out and so they, I
don't believe we're here today.
And so,
Um, I think we've resolved that
particular problem and, and
really the way we did that is
just we left it alone, and we
just reduced the amount of time,
uh, we have a 90 day period that
no sale can occur uh sooner than
90 days, which turns out was the
longest in the nation. And so
we've picked 45, which is kind
of in the middle of the pack,
uh, of uh of time frames around
the country.
And so I'll just stop right
there.
Uh
Yeah, uh, Joe, Joe Doherty.
Are you on Zoom? Joe Doherty?
He's our yes, Mr. Chairman, yes,
I am here. OK, um, do you, he's
part of your expertise, right,
and Miss Traynor's indicating
the sponsors indicating they
don't need any additional help
from me right now, Mr. Doherty,
but we'll come to you if they
need some help. So, committee
members with questions.
Anyone else that Maus. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Trujillo, Mr. Traynor, when does
the 45 days start?
It starts from um, the, uh, 45
days starts from the initial um
Um, publication from the very
first publication.
So
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh
Ms. Traynor, but say for
example, I have storage, it's
due on the 5th, I pay it on the
1st, I don't pay it. My credit
card, you know, times out or
whatever.
Technically, I'm late 30 days
later, like, give me the
timeline of when items can be
sold. So, um, if I'm just gonna
break it down the the easy way.
The, um, once you, um, I believe
it's 5 days after you um are
laid on your payment. That's
when things start to, to happen
and there's a publication that
occurs fifteen-day publication,
and then there's another 15-day
publication. So the, um, uh, and
that has always existed, we
again, we're not changing that
at all.
There's the initial notification
that you're late and
notification and then uh that's
the, the notice to enforce the
lien and then the second
notification is to enforce the
lien and it's a two publications
in um um uh consecutive weeks or
essentially 15 days. And so
you've got a 30-day period of
time there. And so the total
amount of time, um, for the
notifications is 30 days, the,
the quickest we would, uh, you
could uh
that, I believe it's 45 days.
I see. Thank you. And, and I
realized notifications were
important back in the day.
They're like requirements for
email, text messages, phone
calls.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Trujillo, Mr. Traynor,
is there requirements in statute
to email the person or text
message to the person or call
the person as opposed to put a
But a notification in a
newspaper.
Uh, which is a dying industry.
Mr. Chairman said let me let uh
our expert Joe Dougherty
addressed that he might.
Mr. Chairman, I can address that
question.
But
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes, if,
if the tenant wants to receive
the notice by email. They just
indicate in the agreement that
that's how they want the notice
to be provided and it will be
provided that way. Additionally,
the, the owners as a matter of
practice will also call and and
text the tenants to try to track
them down if, if they don't
respond to that email notice.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. So apparently it's
just kind of a matter of course,
but there's no really.
Uh
Strong modern outline in
statute. So this bill
essentially bumps it from 90
days to 45 days, but also kind
of beefs up the disclosure of
the customer to a provider.
An alternative number. But
there's, but Mr. Chairman,
Senator, there's no requirements
to
To call that number, what is the
requirement on the owner of the
storage to to to find the person
in statue on page 5, it has the
owner shall provide written
notice by verified mail to the
last known address of the
occupant or alternative contract
by electronic mail to the last
known electronic address of the
occupant or alternative. So
there's there there's multiple
ways for that. It doesn't have
anything in here that they have
to make a.
Phone call though, but we do
believe that having this
alternative person, um, is gonna
be really helpful to help to
find those individuals, and I, I
do want to note that this
statute this bill actually
requires that anybody who
currently has a storage unit,
those storage units have to go
back and notify the current um
renters of the unit to get that
third party notification to give
them the option to come in and
add a third party.
Thank you.
Senator O'Malley and Senator
Dede.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I think
the provision in there that um.
Uh
Requires that, you know, that
may be a third party.
Um, that, that would be
notified. I think that's a good
one. I do have issues with
shortening the, the, um,
Time for sale to 45 days because
also there's fees associated
with that being, um, you're
adding fees, and then you're
shortening that time for some,
uh, for someone to be able to
sell off the uh the asset.
Yeah, and I say that because um
You know, a lot of times people
put things in storage cause
they're having difficulty,
they're probably finding a place
to live or that's sort of like
the only alternative to store
their stuff, um, and there's a
lot of reasons why people do
that, but I, yeah, I don't think
that's, that's fair to the to
the user. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, see, I have
heartburn over this, this spell.
I think a 20% late fee is
unreasonable.
Um,
I think limiting the
Trying to limit the value of the
stored property, whatever they
put in the, the contract, uh, is
unreasonable, especially when.
If they auction it off, and they
auction it for higher than that,
there, they would get to keep
those proceeds, I think, under
this bill now.
OK.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, no, and
we clarified that at the last um
committee and so I feel
confident saying this, um, and
the expert helped me understand
that, no, it would, if they sell
the uh auction it off and they
get more than the amount, then
that extra amount goes to the
owner of the storage unit. It, I
mean, it would go to pay off any
late fees, any fees due, but
above that, um, it would go back
to the, to the individual. And.
center, am I missing that
somewhere in the bill? Does it
say that in here?
We can, we can bring our expert
in for that.
OK.
And Joe, can you answer that
question, please? Oh, sorry, I
apologize. I was thought,
thought I was on mute. uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, that, that is
part of the, the existing law in
New Mexico that anything, any
funds that are in excess of the
amount owed by the tenant are
considered unclaimed property if
they're not claimed by the
tenant, so it, it's something
that's already in law.
Well, and Mr. Cha, that's
different, I think, than what
I'm saying that there it's
unclaimed property.
that
Go ahead. I think what he's
trying to say is that they have
to give the money back and if
they can't find the person, they
still don't get to keep the
money, it then becomes unclaimed
property that would go into
unclaimed, uh,
Holdings
That that's correct.
OK. Um,
Yeah, I don't think that fixes
my my concerns on this, uh.
I, I think this is something
that's going to
disproportionately impact lower
income folks, uh, and
And I don't
Honestly, I don't see the need
for it. So I'm, I'm gonna, I'm a
no on this one. Thank you, Mr.
Cha.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I do
also have some heartburn about
the fees, and I've actually got
a proposed amendment cause I, I
don't have a problem charging a
late fee of no more than $20.
It's the 20% of the monthly rent
that just seems excessive. So I
would move on page 9, line 13.
To after the $20 and then the
brackets delete or 20% of the
monthly rent, comma, whichever
is greater, comma.
So with that change, it would
just be no more than.
$20. I just, you got a $1000
storage unit charging $200 a
month just seems excessive, so.
That, that's out.
So it's only going to be an
owner, I'll read it after the
amendment. An owner may charge
and collect a late fee of no
more than $20 for each month at
the occupant's rental payment is
in default, period.
Just taking out the
The 20%, whichever is less. You
don't need the whichever is
less, I don't think if you have
the $20 less than $20.
So it's worth us
So it's worth.
Mr. Chairman, we'll take that as
a friendly amendment.
But
professional
I wouldn't imagine your industry
would accept that amendment.
That doesn't sound like a very
good amendment as as a business
owner, but um they we're
probably gonna adopt it when
when you say it's just $20 a
month for a late fee, then
there's not very much of a
disincentive to not go in too
late, right, uh, it's only gonna
be an additional $20 a month,
um, then be late, um, and I'd be
late all the time if, if you
have a such a minor like late
fee, and again, I, some for some
folks, $20 a month maybe not
minor, but um I've used these
units before and I'm paying
usually substantial amount of
money, so the percentage, the
percentage should probably be
tinkered with is 20% of the
monthly rent may be high, but,
but when it's a fixed $20 a
month, again, you're gonna have
folks getting late and in the
end, all you can really collect
is the $20 for the hassle of.
Again, having to get them on
notice and.
Right
For them to to do stuff, so I,
I, I think that's probably
inadequate, but if the sponsor
says it's favorable and the
industry says it's favorable,
who am I to protect people from
themselves, I guess so, in any
event, we're on that proposed
amendment, you know, is there
any other discussion on the
proposed amendment?
You have Emily, right? All
right, so none of the amendments
adopted. Um, center work, you
still have the floor.
That's all I have. All right,
very good. Senator O'Malley.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
would also
Attempt to make an amendment and
and it would be in um.
On page 4 and and I'll go back
to the idea that I really like
the the provision here that
allows for a third party to be
notified.
page 4, I really think that um.
The default should remain on 90
days.
And item 4 that would be line
18.
Uh, that would be, um,
I'm not exactly sure what that
would, I would say, but I'd say
to delete 45 days and.
That the way it would work?
8 for you to restore 90 and to
restore 90 on on on line 18.
And um for to 90 days.
And I think it comes up again.
Does it come up again or is that
it?
On page 9, it comes up again.
And that's uh on uh page 9, line
24, uh, same motion to, to
restore 90 days.
OK, that's the motion
proposed amendment. Discussion
on proposed Senator Stewart.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I want to hear
from the sponsor and her experts
about uh the reason for the
change and how they feel about
the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, um, Madam Protem. So taking
it down to the 45 days. This is
a business. This is a business
where you're renting a location
to store your goods, and as, as
long as those goods remain in
that storage unit, then the
owner is unable to actually own
that, uh, I mean, to, to lease
that to another individual.
Again, this is a business and
we're leasing space to store.
Poverty and the 90 days actually
will then increase the fees,
right? So by the time you get to
the point of 90 days, you have
so many fees that you're going
to lose if your property is
actually sold, so you, if you've
gotten to the 45 days, it's
highly probable that you're
gonna get to the 90 days. And,
and, and not resolving that.
Actually takes more money away
from the owner of the property,
so it reduces the amount that
they would get if their items,
unfortunately end up being
auctioned out. So for, for us,
this is not a friendly
amendment. Um, I would defer to
my expert witness and the expert
witness on the phone to give any
other further explanation that
that's my basic explanation.
I'll let you do that without
repetition, please. So Mr.
Train, if there's something else
that she hasn't covered. Um, Mr.
Chairman, Senator.
Um, when, when we looked at all
the states in the, in the time
frames, New Mexico is the
longest in the nation with the
90 days.
Period. And so, you know, we
looked at, we've got um fewer
than 40 days. We have 18 states,
uh 40 to 45 days, we have 16
states, 6061, uh, 10 states, and
4 states more than 61 and 90 is
the longest, and that's New
Mexico, and so we were trying to
put ourselves kind of in the
middle of the pack.
And, and again, if we can't
lease that space, but if I'm in
default of my um payments, um,
they say I could remove that
material and store it somewhere
else. I'm in a storage business.
So where am I gonna store it?
I'm gonna leave it where it is,
and that's the space I can't
lease anymore, so, uh, we, we
would prefer the.
That's all. Thank you.
Sure, can I?
Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, I just to echo, so I
live in this day in and day out,
this is my business and.
Is, is, uh, Senator Trujillo
stated, this is a business, and
To have to wait 90 days to
potentially clear out a space to
where you can then lease it back
out again, to me is, as they've
stated, it's the longest in the
nation and it's just archaic.
There's other states across the
US that have adopted shorter
time periods to allow these
businesses to continue to, to
lease that space out and at the
end of the day, storage is not a
necessity, I understand, you
know, our business is people
that are typically transitional
or they have a need and they're
gonna store some there for a
period of time. Um, but 90
days just there's, you know.
Speaking from my own, you know,
experience. We do everything we
can to contact folks that are
delinquent on their rent,
because at the end of the day,
they don't have 99% of the time,
uh, enough value in the unit for
us to even recoup the costs that
we're owed. And so to drag that
out 90 days just puts a bigger
burden on the person renting
that unit to try and even
reclaim their property, because
now they've built up, you know,
hundreds of dollars and in
outstanding rent payments and a
little bit in late fees.
We don't charge exorbitant late
fees. I think we're at, you
know, $10.05 dollars depending
on kind of what we inherited,
um, for previous owners that we
bought from, um, but yeah, you
know, I would echo for them and
probably others in the industry,
the the 90 days is just really
hard on the owners of these
facilities to continue to carry
that, you know, accounts
receivable balance on a
continual basis, um, that would
be in opposition to that.
Yes, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
After discussion and, and, you
know.
Concerns about the business
industry regarding self storage,
you know, I'm, I'm thinking if
that's OK to amend my amendment
to 60 days instead of
Right.
I
Mr. Chairman, um, thank you and
thank you for the amendment and
the consideration, but it's
still the 45 days is really what
the industry would like to have.
Well, I'll leave it to the
pleasure of the committee.
uh
Post Amendment, but
Right.
That is true, thank you.
So it's, it's still your
amendment, Senator, are you?
Modifying your emotion, yes,
uh, sure I modify my moment and
so I moved down and uh changes
to 60 days. Thank you.
All right, so the committee's
all clear. We're the the motion
before us right now would be to
change that page 4, 18 reference
to 60 days.
From 90, right? That's what
we're on for business right now.
Others on that proposed
amendment.
Mr. Chairman, if I could just
correct that amendment, I
believe it would also have to be
on page 9, where it says 45
days,
24.
Thank you.
That's the matter before us. Any
further discussion?
On the proposed amendment.
Let's just see those in support.
the moment, show of hands,
please.
Post Amendment.
and do it.
Cervantes, the movement fails,
right?
So the bill that's before us
right now would still be a 45
day uh.
Period of time.
Other discussion on the bill.
members that are doing and that
Masters.
So, Mr. Chair, I will propose a
moment to on page 9.
Strikes subsection L.
lines through 11.
That remember that next session.
It was the second to catch up
with you center so page 9 that
again, please?
lines 8 to 11.
Explained what would you,
please.
So this is putting uh a limit
that is saying that the limit is
in that is in the contract is
automatically applied to the
property.
Um
Which
I, I understand these folks
wanting to limit.
The liability and and wanting
But
The truth is, if you have
those pieces of art that you are
storing in one of these and
that.
Yeah and you have a limit in the
contract of it's worth more than
$200.
I don't think it's reasonable to
be held to that $200.
Uh
and ignore the real value.
of, of whatever's in there.
So
Yes, it would be on page 9,
striking lines 8 through 11, and
then renumbering.
that.
section.
Yes.
And and they can, they can
already kind of contract to
limit their liability. We don't
need to have this at all.
already have the the right to do
that, so.
Mr. Chairman, we don't consider
this to be an unfriendly.
I'm not gonna say we consider
it.
We don't
consider it.
Thank you.
Double negatives, triple
negative twist the words around,
so that's not it. I'm, that's
not an unfriendly amendment,
right, but
Yeah, no comment whether it's
friendly or not prefer to leave
it in,
but it's not the basis of why we
have this bills, I guess.
And um, so on that proposed
amendment questions or comments
on that proposed amendments that
is that a so this uh Senator
Paul, I appreciate hearing your
thoughts and you, you're
familiar with this. I'm just
curious. I mean, again, I, I,
when I read this, I mean the
rental agreement specifies a
limit, and you stick up $100,000
piece of art in there.
Uh, I just have a hard time
thinking you should be able to,
if you do it knowingly and take
the risk. I, I guess I've got
the other side of this, you
contractually agreed to that.
limit, I think.
But I'm curious just in terms of
the practice of
How this plays out. Let me
versus send call and send her to
it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So
I would assume, and correct me
if I'm wrong, most rental
agreements are written is that
to the effect that
The owner of the facility is not
liable for anything stored in
the unit. So, the value of
what's stored in there, you can
put a cap on that to prevent
people from storing collectible
cars, things like that, that,
hey, you know, now you've got a
customer. I mean, from my
perspective would be is, I don't
want you storing a a collectible
car in a storage unit, that's
gonna get dusty, and now you're
gonna have a bad sour taste
because maybe we didn't provide
a, you know, the service that
you were expecting, but our, our
rental agreements all state that
we're not liable for the
contents of the unit.
So to me, just in my opinion,
not being a lawyer, the value
doesn't really matter. You can
choose what you want to put in
there, um, but we can also limit
what we allow to be stored in
there, so it, at our facilities
where we don't have larger
units, we don't allow vehicles
to be stored in those units.
Obviously someone can store
whatever they want in there,
but, you know, it would have to
be under the
Cloak of dark.
that, that helped me. Thank you.
Mr. Cha, I, I think what we
heard from Paul is they can
already do this, so what, so.
We need to put this on.
If if they can already contract
for what they want to contract
for, why do we need a provision
in law?
About that.
question
No.
Mr. Chairman, it is kind of a
rhetorical question, um, the
industry was just looking for
some, some, some support that if
they put this limit on, then the
law says that they have the
right to do that.
Are you, are you rethinking your
agnostic position on the
amendments that are, I think you
are, right? I am Mr. Chairman.
I, I, I, I trust the way that
you're interpreting this and,
and we're not gonna call it
again. I, I haven't had an
opportunity to confer with the
industry, but I will say that it
is likely not unfriendly
amendment. So I'll stick with
that. So you're back to
agnostic. I, I was giving you a
chance there to support the
amendment. I, I think when you
go back and and think on it,
some of you probably support it,
the industry probably.
support it too, Mr. Chair, I
just think this was drafted so
that the limit they're referring
to in line 10 is the limit in
the rental agreement.
The language is not.
Well done, but I think the
intent of what they were trying
to do is not do the opposite,
which, which you're
Put on your lawyer hat, right.
So yeah, and we'll all spend
time figuring out what the
intent was, but if you read it
literally, um, this does harm to
the renel agreement, I think, so
that's why we try here not to
create issues for the courts and
to interpret later, so. Anyway,
we're on the proposed amendment.
Any other discussion, the
amendment is to strike
subsection L on page 9. Is there
any objection to that amendment?
That amendments adopted.
We're back on the bill, and I
had the Senator Maest just after
Senator, Senator, you saw the
floor and then Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator,
gentlemen, I don't know if this.
Matters or not, but page 2.
Page 2 line 8.
Or it reads shall also contain
the address of the occupant.
Uh, after the war, I, I moved
that after the word address we
insert.
Uh
uh
Phone number and electronic
address.
Of the occupant was party there,
but this, this statue was
written, Miss Truman in 1987,
and so it kind of gives us a
chance to.
You know, bring it into the 21st
century a little bit.
Restate your memory again. So
between the words address and of
after the word address, uh, page
2 line 8.
Uh, comma.
Telephone number
And electronic.
Uh mail address.
Of the occupant.
All right, proposed amendment
discussion.
Anyone?
Sponsor, yes, thank you Mr.
Chairman, that is a friendly
amendment actually, and I do
believe that it's the practice
that all of the um uh rental
units are collecting at the very
least electronic. I know I pay
for my storage unit via
electronics and so I think
that's a common practice.
Right. No, uh, the sponsor
favors the proposed amendment.
Any more discussion? Any
objection to adopting that
amendment?
none, that amendment is adopted,
said, you have the floor.
Thank you.
it. All right, very good. Anyone
else on the bill as amended?
All right, uh, is there a motion
as amended?
Make the motion.
I'm moving too fast.
There you go, Senator Paul. Well
done. Yes, Mr. Chair, I, I do
think we might consider this as
a sub, given all the different
amendments. I think it would be
cleaner coming out of here if it
passes. I just want to throw
that out. Yeah, um.
Senator, is that acceptable to
you understand what we're
talking about, right? We try and
send bills out of here without
pages of amendments because then
the members on the floor have to
track those and when it goes
over the house, they have to
track them to we, we have enough
time sometimes we don't follow
that when we're late on time in
the session, but you had enough
time to have a clean bill going
over. Is there, is there a
house?
Uh, mirror to this? No? OK.
Yeah, it probably makes sense to
do that too, so, so uh, Senor, I
think the, the motion is gonna
be passed the committee
substitute, right?
Uh, let's let's at center Paul
do it.
So I move a do not pass on
Senate Bill 180, but I do pass
on the committee substitute for
SB 180.
Is that correct? That's, that's
it, right? And we'll incorporate
the amendments. Emily will have
the amendments that we, we'll
come up with a committee sub and
we'll report that out, right?
So, is there any objection to
that do pass.
On the motion as stated,
uh, Senator O'Malley and Senator
Doig.
All other members and support.
You have a DuP pass senator with
that uh committee substitute.
Uh, let's see here.
Uh, and again, I'm not dissing
Senator Brandt or others who are
here, some of yours are gonna
involve some more time, I think
some more discussion, so I'm
looking for your center of
Woods, um, senator just jumping
around to get more business done
as possible, Senator.
Aramio, you're here in.
And I, you're here. Senator
Isel, let's do yours real quick,
yours is, I think pretty
straightforward in it.
Too
Yeah.
Retirement of the state flag.
So at 63.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
Today I am here on behalf of a
couple of Girl Scout troops in
my particular district and I've
lost my glasses here they are.
They wanted community.
Awareness of how to dispose of
the New Mexico state flag in the
respectful manner that it should
be.
Mr. Chairman,
Get my paper to turn. I am so
sorry.
Uh, and what they're talking
about is when the flag should be
disposed of when it is no longer
used, used or useful, and Mr.
Chairman, this was set in place
many, many years ago by the
American Legion, it was actually
uh passed through Congress on
December 22, 1942.
On the proper disposal of a worn
flag by ceremonial burning or
burial.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I will stand for
questions.
Don't have any anyone signed in
support or opposition center, so
we'll go to members of the
committee.
Good questions.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Senator Eel, so you're saying
that this basically reflects the
the language on how to deal
with.
The flag
The US flag.
About
turn this back on. I'm so sorry.
Uh, it does whenever the
American Legion did develop this
and got it passed through
Congress, there was a code, it's
law number 829 Title 36.
Uh, that was adopted by Congress
on the proper way of disposal of
worn flags by ceremonial burning
or burial. Right now this flag
can be.
Buried and it goes through uh
read the exact language here,
um, if I can find it.
Uh, can be directed by military
personnel or by a patriotic
society or in a private
ceremony. These flags can also
be placed in a box and buried,
or it can be a solemn.
Burning ceremony as well.
That's how the American flag is
dealt with. There's a proper way
to hold the flag upon burial or
burning, and I think that uh
Senator Charley and Senator
Sinta Pinto both wanted me to
check with the native tribes and
I have done that in the state,
and they said yes we would like
for our flag to be.
Ceremoniously.
A retired, but we don't want it
to overshadow that of the United
States. Uh thank you, Senator.
I, I guess what I'm just
thinking is that this is very
ambiguous language, you know,
preferably by burning uh
ceremony in a dignified manner,
um, you know, who, what, what do
we consider to be
patriotics, you know, uh,
organization, I mean, there's
just, and I guess if this
reflects the.
You, you know, the
How you handle US flag.
I mean, uh, since 1945, um, you
know,
But I, I guess I'm sort of
surprised that the ambiguity
just concerning the US flag.
Thank you, Senator.
Questions or comments?
Um, I just have like one or two
real quickly, center, so when it
reads your bill says if a New
Mexico state flag is no longer
used, so this would be any
state, any state flag of the
state of New Mexico, so I, I've
got state, I've got a big state
flag at my house that I put out
for parties or events, uh, so
is, is that within capture
within this bill that state
flag.
Or is this or is this something
that flies over the Capitol?
What is a what is a New Mexico
State flag by your bill?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, the state flag that
flies outside of our capital,
there is uh there is a.
Request line if you want to call
it that for.
Schools or other patriot or
other entities that do want to
have a Mexican flag that has
been flown over the state
capitol to be at their place of
employment or whatever the case
may be,
a school as your bill says if a
New Mexico state flag is no
longer used, it says the
retirement of a New Mexico state
flag, so does the state flag
have a meaning that that means
the the one that flies over this
Capitol nose is not the one in
my garage in New Mexico State
flag.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I have a flagpole put
up at my house, I put it up, but
not at in honor of 9/11. I fly
the American flag and I fly the
state flag as well.
Because the storms that we do
have down in my particular area,
our flags down there last about
a year.
Yeah, but I got a real simple
question, Senator, which is
when you your bill says New
Mexico state flag. What does
that mean? Is that, is that
yellow flag with the red symple
on it, Mr. Chairman. So that
means flag, so that means when
you fly, it's got to be done by
a ceremony when you retire.
And this is just bringing
community awareness.
Yeah I've got that, but I,
again, if I, if I got a state
flag in my garage, which I,
again, is I, I do, and I just,
do I?
If it's, if I'm never gonna use
it, I guess.
I guess I'm OK with your
building a flag may be destroyed
by burning, but I guess I could
also put it in the trash, right?
So when it says I'm not gonna,
I'm, I'm not, I know that's
disrespectful, and I say that.
But you know, not in a way to
sound disrespectful, but, but if
your bill says the flag may be
destroyed.
Uh, and it says, it just says it
may be destroyed. And it says
preferably by burning, but, but
that means that doesn't mean
that I can't destroy it by
putting it in the trash can.
Mr. Chairman, you're exactly
right. We these young ladies,
and I think the Boy Scout troops
also just want recognition
brought to the dignity of our
flag of the state.
Yeah.
And, and your bill says the
retirement of, of the flag
that's in my garage maybe by a
public ceremony, but it doesn't
say it has to be done that way
too, so is there any, is there
any reason why, um, we can't do
this now, uh we can't have a
retirement by a public ceremony
without this law.
Chairman, whenever.
Whenever it's states on page one
of my bill, it says uni under
the direction of uniformed
personnel representing a state
or federal military service or
patriotic society or a private
ceremony that does give you the
right to do that. What we
usually do with our flags, we
either take them to the American
Legion posts for the disposal
there or to a Boy Scout troop.
This is helping them receive
them. I'm not sure what they
call that, is that the metals
that they receive, I think.
allowing them to go on to
receive higher honors in the
troop.
All right, any other questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Zel the.
So the retirement in Section B,
the retirement is is referencing
this ceremony, correct? Or?
When, whenever the
We don't want a re, actually,
there's a Johnny Cash song out
there. I'm mighty proud of my
ragged old flag, but there comes
a point whenever that raggedo
flag is beyond recognition, and
I think that we don't want our
flag displayed in that in that
manner,
if I could ask you to look on um
on line 17.
So the in paragraph B, it uses
the word retirement, but it
doesn't reference it prior to
that.
So if you could look on page 17
where it says uh.
You know, when the flag is no
longer used, comma, the flag may
be destroyed.
Would you consider this a
friendly amendment where.
After the word the.
We insert two words retirement
of, so it says the retirement of
the flag may be.
Now it doesn't work, doesn't
work. Never mind, I'll withdraw
that.
Thank you.
Just, just one comment, Mr.
Chair. I mean, I.
Burning flags, obviously is an
issue just out there with folks,
and I thought actually one of
the things though that this
bill.
I think the important piece of
this bill is it does say there's
a preference for actually
burning the flag when it's
destroyed and so.
Oh
There's a lot of language in
here that's squishy.
Uh, for sure, but I, that's a
piece of this bill that I do
think is something that a lot of
folks don't.
Necessarily know and this would
certainly educate in that
direction that the preference is
to actually burn the flag to
destroy it. So I just want to
make that comment. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Yeah, that's going to fly in the
face of our greenhouse gas
emissions legislation this
session, I think too is that, I
mean, we're, we're, I mean, when
the, when the more
environmentally uh preferred way
to, I mean, we're making light
of it, but let's be consistent,
right, if we're saying the
preferred ways to burn the flag
as opposed to maybe recycle the
flag or uh I I I I don't mean to
make light of this, I know it's
a serious issue to you, Senator,
and so forth, but again, I just,
I'm, I'm sometimes uh perplexed
by our duplicity by saying,
yeah, we're the.
Preference here is to burn, uh,
the flag as opposed to recycling
the flag, which might be more in
line with U Mexico values, I
think, so, um, in any event, um.
I, I'm not gonna post the bill,
but mostly because you invoked
the Girl Scouts, I think or
something like that, so I I and
and the American Legion who were
again, incredible um
contributors to our communities
in our state. I, I guess I
I kind of see words, uh,
position, which is there
there's.
I'll, I'll just tell you,
usually it's not my, my habit to
pass laws that are permissive,
so when you say the the flag may
be destroyed, well, of course,
the flag may be destroyed, um,
and we say preferably by
burning, preferably is not a
law, right, it's kind of say,
well, we'd like you to do this,
but we're not saying you must do
this and um and I, I generally
oppose those kind of bills that
say we'd like for you to do
something, it's kind of our wish
that kind of borders on the
memorial language, right? It,
it's
sounds to me like
Um, this is our preference, but
we ought to say what we what we
uh intend here and, and that's
as a lawyer, I, I want clear law
to say you must do this or you
must not do that, and, and here
saying something may be done.
Well, that also means it may not
be there. And when it says we
prefer this, that doesn't say
anything.
much either too, so I hope
you'll work on this a little bit
more, maybe between now and if
it, if it advances on the house
or on the floor or some other
place too, but um.
Probably vote for it here so we
can hear more about it. So
OMalley and Sarah um
I, I agree that it probably
would be more fitting in a
memorial situation, because I
think it's also, it has more, I
don't know, I don't say gravitas
or whatever because now it's
basically an app and it's not
clear.
Um, and so, uh, as a former
Uh, Campfire Girl.
I feel like it's evoke the
campfire Girls, no, um, that,
um, that, yeah, I think it's
more fitting in a memorial.
Thank you.
Mo.
Any further discussion?
Um, is there any objection to do
pass?
Senator O'Malley
Rejecting all others in support.
Uh, you have with your bass.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
Senate 123, Senator Jaramillo
again, reminder for those of
you, Senator Brant, Senator
Woods, no disrespect to you,
yours are gonna take a little
bit more discussion, a little
bit more time, I think than
these that we're knocking out
pretty quick, I hope so.
We're gonna hear you for sure
today, Senator Jarami, Senate
123. Good, good morning, Mr.
Chairman, Senate Bill 123 is
requesting an amendment of the
regional Transit Act to
authorize law enforcement
officers on regional transit
district buses. This bill will
allow for any of our 4 existing
RTDs to create their own transit
law enforcement agency if
needed, as are currently
permitted on trains like the
rail runner, uh, SB 123 grants
peace officer powers on district
property.
And requires them to undergo
basic training and certification
for one year of employment.
District officers would be
required to attend the basic
academy training, which is
offered twice a year. Joining me
this morning, Mr. Chairman, is
my expert witness, Esteban
Sanchez, who's general counsel
to the Regional Transit
District, and we'll be here to
answer any questions, and we're
ready to take any questions if
you are. Thank you. We don't
have anyone signed up in support
or opposition.
But do you want to add anything?
No, I think
Senator Armi really laid it out
clearly, um, and I'll just stand
for any questions?
Not seeing any questions, so
I'll take a motion.
Senator Stewart with a due pass
motion.
Any further discussion, debate,
any objection to do pass,
sinners, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Senator Brant, Senate Bill 70.
chairman for getting this
rescheduled.
Um, you should have before you
is this substitutes.
Um, for Senate Bill 70 that
removes
All references to criminal
gangs, including the
definitions.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I move it do
not pass the Senate Bill 70 and
82 passport purposes of
discussion on committees
substitute for cynical 70.1
center Bran, go ahead. You were
about to say.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman, um.
All we've done on this pill is
removed all the references to
criminal gangs, including the
definitions of criminal gangs,
so criminal gangs are not in
here at all anymore, um, it, it
leaves everything else intact.
There was a lot of confusion
around that and talking to
Senator Cervantes. We really
kind of feel like that's covered
already under organizations.
And doesn't really need to have
a separate.
Call out
Right, um, in
Let's see, support.
We have the deputy chief back
there.
Hiding in the shadows, come on
up. We've got you signed up.
And then JD Bullington.
Signed up as well too.
Chief
Wagger.
Support.
They are members of the
committee. Thank you for having
me today, Deputy Dale Wagner in
New Mexico State Police.
Um, expanding New Mexico's
racketeering statute would see
combat organized criminal
activity.
OK.
Racketeering laws are designed
to target and dismantle criminal
organizations by enabling law
enforcement to prosecute a wide
range of criminal actions that
are part of a larger criminal
enterprise.
By broadening the scope of the
offenses covered under the
racketeering statute.
The state can better address and
penalize a broader spectrum of
criminal activities,
particularly those tied to
organized crime.
This expansion would strengthen
New Mexico's efforts to combat
criminal organizations on
multiple fronts.
From traditional crimes like
drug trafficking, the emerging
threats such as human
trafficking, financial fraud.
In doing so, the state would
improve public safety.
Increased coordination between
law enforcement agencies.
And ensure more effective
prosecution for high-level
organized crime.
GPS strongly supports this bill
as it addresses the
long-standing challenge in
identifying and tackling
upstream criminal actors that
are a part larger criminal
enterprises.
By providing law enforcement
with additional legal tools,
this bill will focus on
dismantling the most serious and
dangerous criminal elements.
Rather than targeting low-level
crimes that are often driven by
a criminal organization.
Thank you, Chief.
Uh
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, which also supports
this legislation bills aimed at
dealing with hand as crimes
committed by organized groups,
by expanding the state's
racketeering Act to include
crimes such as sexual
exploitation of children and
other crimes that were mentioned
by the state police chief.
This bill also targets the
leaders of organized crime
groups, specifically making it a
crime to solicit or coerce
another person, including a
minor, into being a member of or
working with their criminal
enterprise.
Human trafficking is a growing
problem.
Because organized crime is
increasingly involved.
Racketeering statutes are
designed to go after just these
kinds of organizations.
Prosecutors in the state.
Law enforcement needs Senate
Bill 70 to have a new set of
tools to protect the public.
And Mr. Chair, uh, thank you
very much. Uh, thank you,
Senator, for bringing this
forward. I think this is really
good to.
Uh
The addition, all the additional
items that I see listed here to
add to our racketeering.
Um
The only thing that I feel
missing is the um
When they, when I can't now
remember the term, but then when
people are stored in a in a
house, um.
And
And the, the person who is
actually responsible for that
house and they when we know that
people are being human
trafficked in their home. That
was something I just, I would.
Had I known, I probably would
have added this to the list, and
so that may be something
hopefully we can add later, uh,
down the line should we get
through this, but I, I think
this is a good bill, um.
It gives law enforcement more
ability to.
to go after, uh, this kind of
element that's been invading
our, our, our state, and so, uh,
I'm hoping we can get this
through the committee. Thank you
for bringing it forward.
Yes, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I'm, I'm having a little
difficulty thinking about what a
racketeering act is because I
thought it involved.
Uh, groups of people.
Doing things, but the additions
to this, um, many of them are
just individual things like
escaping from jail and escaping
from the penitentiary, so.
She Brent, can you kind of
explain to me what you've come
to think of as the racketeering
law cause I, you know, I'm not
an attorney, I don't do criminal
law. I don't understand how we
have these very individual
things and we're calling them
racketeering.
Chair.
Mr. Fer
Oh
All these formalities, right?
No, I should know by 13 years,
right? But, uh, yeah, thank you
Mr. Chairman and Senator, um,
for me, RICO statute is about
organized crime. It's about
going after.
The, the head of the snake, uh,
and trying to, you know.
Get the the crime organization
dealt with and out of the way. I
think we see a lot of that, uh,
in New Mexico when it comes to
drug dealing, when it comes to
those things, um, when it comes
to the uh prison breaks, it
would, this would only kick in
if it was like an organized.
organization behind that prison
break.
Um, if it's just an individual
breaks out on his own, that's
already covered. That's gonna be
charged under something else. If
it's a group.
Criminal gang and they're
working together, and they'll go
after the head of that gang.
Um, so that's where
You'd have a subtle difference,
um, and it would really depend
on the prosecutor, whether they
could prove a case that would
show that it was an organization
that got that person out, or
Just that person got out on the.
Uh, so Mr. Chairman, so.
So if I went to uh uh when I'm
looking to escape from jail, and
then that's provided in the
section. It's those sections
that talk about it in the
different terms that elevate it
to racketeering.
All right. Still trying to
I, I support this, I think,
still trying to understand.
Why we need to do this in a
racketeering statute when we
already have statues for it, but
I will continue to listen. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I also
have a question about the uh
Page 4, line 23, tampering with
public records.
Give me an example what what?
What is a racket, I mean, where
did that come from? It just
doesn't, I, I'm all in on the
trafficking and the sexual
exploitation of children.
I could see
You know, certainly that is
where you've got an enterprise,
but.
Hampering with public records?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
um,
You know, I, I think again, it
depends on whether it's done by
an individual.
Now, um, you work for criminal
courts by yourself and you're
getting paid to.
To change some records or if
it's done by an organization,
you know, it's, it's an
organized event.
Uh, organized.
Activity, but yeah, that one's a
little bit tough.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, and then
impersonating a police officer.
I just
This where the cartel decides to
have
A group of law enforcement folks
walking or people walking around
and
I just I'm trying to think, you
know, what are we?
Mr.
Chair, maybe that's the answer,
um.
For the whole, you know,
I just, I just think these are
the ones that cause me concern.
And again, I also have the
escape from jail is the same
thing. I just have a hard time.
It doesn't seem like that's
really the gist of what a
racketeering statute should be
used for. I mean, I'm in for the
and
You know, organized crime and
dogfighting and cockfighting, I
can see that.
Certainly, I just
But some of these, and again we
can talk more about them and
maybe we want to amend some of
these out and narrow this, um,
I would feel more comfortable
with that. I, I appreciate you
made the other change because I
think that was creating a bunch
of
Of concern.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman Senator, you
know, the, this, this was.
came from the DA association was
the add-ons, this is actually,
they recommended taking the
Texas racketeering Act, um,
which is where this came from,
um, but that was the DA's
recommendation.
What are the DAs here today?
Yeah, pattern we see pattern
here throughout this whole
session, which is people who
should be here.
Or not showing up for these
committee meetings and they're
going to get the results that,
that, uh, I think maybe befall
them so let's be honest, the,
the, the laws that we're talking
about are not about.
So if there's something that
needs to be amended off, I
would, I would, uh, more than
welcome it.
Um, so it's more understandable
and clearer.
is not a problem, I think
expanding it, you know, my
biggest ones are, you know, the,
the criminal sexual contact, the
human trafficking, you know,
those types of things, I think
we really need to go after
because we're seeing a huge
increase in those in our I'm not
in love with any of these other
ones, you said, I'm sorry, you
said a word you said on the
floor, but you said which two
are the ones you love? Well, I'm
just saying these these ones on
sexual exploitation of children,
the criminal sexual penetration,
uh, criminal, you know, sexual
contact.
Um, I've never been to a dog or
a cockfight, but, um, the, the
animal protection voters love
the fact that this is in here,
so I'd love just to keep that in
there. That's the first time
they've ever shown me any love,
um.
Uh
I can see contraband uh as being
something that's pretty clear.
Um, and the human trafficking,
you know, the other ones, if,
if, if.
You know, if it's the will of
the committee, they not be in
there.
That's fine.
I just think we need to expand
those those most heinous crimes
that we're talking about.
silhouette so must share what
I'm hearing is.
3132, 3335 and 36.
Are the ones Senator Stewart
brought up, and I'm going to
make a motion to.
So remove.
sections 31, 32, 33. So that
would be on page 4, strike lines
15 through 20.
And then also removed.
35.
And 36, which would be lines 23
through 25 in line.
One on
the top of page 5, and then we
need to renumber.
34, which is the contraband and
renumber the human trafficking,
so they tracked.
do a cleanup. Mr. Chair, we'll
definitely, I think that makes
sense. We do a clean up, so.
I'm hearing that that sounds
like that's not necessarily
Unfriendly.
I was doing what the DA
association had asked for not at
all. So Senator Rich just so I'm
clear in our, our secretary is
clear, you're proposing on pages
4 and 5 to strike from the list
of what would be new crimes,
what would, what is now in uh
this bill subparagraphs 31, 32,
33, 35, and 36, is that right?
Mr. G, that's correct. OK.
That's the motion before us.
Let's take this in pieces
because there may be more
coming, but we'll, we'll take
these at this time. Any
discussion on those, the
sponsors said he doesn't have a
problem with these. Is there an
objection to adopting that
amendment?
Those are gone, and if the DA's
matter, uh, this matter to them,
you'd think they'd be here, but
they're not here.
OK, Senor, you still have the
floor.
That's true, that's, that's my
piece at this point. Others
committee members that are
doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So I'm looking on page
6 at the subsection D.
And it says it's unlawful for a
person to solicit or coerce
another person, including a
minor, and to becoming or
continuing.
As a member of an enterprise.
And then there's an aura there,
but that, that first part, that
is its own full sentence. And if
we look on page 5 at the
definition of enterprise.
It means a sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation,
business, labor union,
association or other legal
entity or a group of persons
associated, in fact, although
not a legal entity and includes
lia as well as illicit entities.
So what this, this is making it
a 3rd degree felony.
To, um,
Have anyone join any group.
Yeah, we've been this is
groundhog day. I mean
the same issue first week of the
session.
war that was there, you had.
Scratch his head.
or changes
Yes, I understand that you're a
pastor.
Oh
Well, and so, not sure.
I think I'm just gonna move to
strike or strike D.
Um
So it would be page 6, lines 16
through 20.
striking out.
He
Well, so I was gonna get to eat.
I'll, I'll continue on, um.
So he, he is also problematic,
especially as a first degree
felony.
We, we, we just took out the
escape from from jail stuff, but
the example I was thinking of
was if, uh, you have two guys in
jail and girlfriend rents a
truck to help them escape from
jail.
Uh, she, she is now subject to
a, a greater penalty than if she
had shot someone.
As a a first degree.
felony.
Um
And I, I, I understand what the
intent is behind you.
Uh
But
I, I, I think it is still
problematic.
Ezra.
So I'll, I'll, I'll propose to
strike both D and E.
Just because I I have no more
artful suggestions in.
Yeah
Right
have heard me say it many times
before, if we're going to attack
crime, we need all the players.
Need the courts, you need the
prosecutors, and we rarely see
the prosecutors involved in the
process. In fact, I think for
this last summer's special
session. I see the governors the
lead on this thing. DA didn't
get involved at all, didn't,
didn't participate, didn't
recommend, didn't uh support any
of the initiatives before us.
So, uh, when we talk about the
legislature being an obstacle to
crime.
I'm going to point the finger
where I think it belongs. So,
then I know that's beyond the
amendment, but Senator Doick's
got a proposed amendment
striking D&E, um, nobody here be
heard in opposition. So is there
any objection to that proposed
amendment?
Seeing none of those amendments
are adopted, striking
subsections D&E from the bill.
Senator Doo you to the floor.
Mr. Chair, that's all I have for
right now. I apologize for
coming in late on this.
No, it's not late.
And in fairness to the the
sponsor for his work on it, I
appreciate his willingness to be
open to these suggestions. I'll
just remind everybody we heard
this bill, I think the first
bill we heard with this session,
and I put it on the first week
for you, Senator, because you've
been working on it so long and
you'd proposed it even during
the special session, and I got
to tell you the same points that
Senator Duke's making today are
the same points I made 34 weeks
ago, so shouldn't be any
surprise, Senator Doo, you still
have the floor of them.
Mr. Chair, that's all all I
have.
They're in centers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator for bringing it,
the, the, uh.
So what I recall is.
racketeering, I think a Rico,
which is the acronym and federal
law that, that, um,
That, you know, federal
prosecutors utilize the Congress
passed and federal prosecutors
utilized.
To convict people of
conspiracies in which the right
hand didn't know what the left
hand was doing to connect
mobsters over here with mobsters
over here, leave the government
tremendous tremendous power and
is credited with
Taking down a lot of organized
crime elements.
You know, uh, back in the 70s,
and so this bill was written by
our legislature in 1980.
Um, it hasn't been amended
since, so I'm, I'm grateful for
you to bringing this forward
and.
I'm trying to add up.
Bad laws to the statute, I
literally.
You know, obviously, we were
compartmentalized in Buro
County, Miss chairman, so we.
prosecuted distinct crimes, but.
And I was in the domestic
violence unit, but I, I didn't
even know we had a rep during
statue in New Mexico, cuz I've
never even seen anyone indicted
on racketeering.
When you look at kind of the
case law, they're all from the
80s, you know, '86, '88, 89
evidence held inefficient and
uh.
Sufficiency of the indictment
and.
You know,
Uh, what is a pattern of
racketeering activity, so this,
so this is a
So I don't know if prosecutors
use this anymore, do you know
Mr. Chairman and about how many
folks have been convicted of
racketeering in the state of
Mexico, the last 5-10 years.
Amish, no, I don't, when I
talked to the AG about this a
couple of years ago, he said
he'd only used it once, right?
So, uh,
Because of the fact that it
didn't cover the crimes.
Understood, and so I appreciate
adding the crimes um.
I agree, D&E uh just didn't fit,
uh.
It's just written kind of weird,
um.
You know, and then, and then
this was, this, this bill was
passed.
I don't know how it got through
Senate Judiciary, but as a
purpose as a purpose clause in
it.
We got to look at who was on the
roster back in 1980, but um,
You know, the purpose of the
racketeering act is to eliminate
the impulse and it's not in the
bill, it's it's we're not
amending that section is to
eliminate and infiltrate.
Uh, to eliminate the
infiltration and illegal
acquisition of legitimate
economic enterprise.
By racketeering practices and
the use of legal and illegal
enterprises to further criminal
activity, in other words.
these, these LLCs, these
businesses, you know, laundering
money, using legitimate
businesses to perpetuate a
criminal enterprise, so it's
kind of.
kind of, kind of a cool.
Criminal statute to give.
Officers and DAs, the resources,
I don't know if.
If local law enforcement would
have the time uh to just delve
into these these investigations
that need to happen.
Um, but nonetheless, I suppose
we should, we should have it.
Have it on the books, so I think
adding the crimes for now, I
think is a good thing I support
it.
I don't think we need to, you
know, D&E didn't need to be
added, but we need to look at.
With the DA's and with the
sensing commission is this.
Effective. Is this effective?
Uh, you know, state resources,
90 90%, it's just street crimes.
It's just dealing with street
crimes.
But to take a step back and and
spend resources dealing with
these organized crime
activities, I think is uh.
Hopefully we have the luxury of
doing that once we get get
control of just everyday street
crimes, but anyway, I didn't
have a.
I'm not sure what the elements
of these crimes are what the
jury instructions are, but I
think regardless of whether this
bill passes or not, we should
definitely dive into that this
summer.
And see if we want to, uh,
Clarify this for, for
prosecutors and judges because
it's just a statute that's not
being utilized for whatever
reason, I'd just be interested
in what those reasons are.
Anyway, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
I'm, I'm a little confused by
some of the internal stuff in
this bill, so page 6, for a, uh,
that starts on 5, at the end of
this, it's a 2nd degree felony,
you violate. Um B, it's a 2nd
degree and see, but then you go
over to F and it says it's
unlawful for a person to
conspire to violate A through E,
which will
amend and then it's a 3rd degree
felony, so you've got an
internal contradiction in the
bill itself.
Um, and then it continues with
the ABC, D E or F, so that will
have to be a massaged a bit with
the amendment we did, but the,
you know, the 2nd degree in ABC
and then 3rd degree in F is, you
know, doesn't make any sense.
I think uh if you don't mind
like.
Uh, yield to my attorney.
Maestus on that,
um.
So Mr. Chairman Senator Stewart,
Senator, that's interesting that
it's in there, so conspiracy is
two persons.
Working in cahoots to do the
same crime and so the the laws
of conspiracy in New Mexico just
drop it up.
One degree below.
So if, if
If the sponsor and I were
conspiring to commit a first
degree crime, we would be guilty
of first degree and then guilty
of conspiracy, which would be a
second degree so this really
tells us what we already know
that.
If you are guilty of conspiring
to commit a second degree
felony, that conspiracy is a 3rd
degree felony.
So it's it, but it doesn't
really contradict.
It just
I don't know why it's in. I, I
think it's in there for the
following reason, Mr. Chairs
that.
Rico, the Rico at the federal
level kind of flipped conspiracy
on its head, you know, we have
crimes, we have conspiracy to
commit crimes, which is when you
work with others, which is
considered a more serious crime
because you're working in
concert with other criminals.
But Rico just kind of at the
federal level just kind of
Did that
10 that we're not just going for
conspiracy, we're going for
Rico.
Which enhances the penalty, not
diminishes it as a result of
being a criminal enterprise, but
anyway, it doesn't contradict
the criminal code, it just tells
us kind of what we already know,
but.
But it was in there
Because this racketeering is
kind of a crime of conspiracy,
anyway.
Thank you.
I have the piracy.
Even if you were conspiring to
commit a crime.
But you hadn't actually carried
out the crime yet. Couldn't she
be charged with conspiracy?
Sorry, even if you were
conspiring to commit a crime,
but hadn't committed it yet.
And uh, you know, couldn't you
be charged with conspiracy?
Like you and I got together and
said, hey, we're gonna rob this
bank, and here's where we're
going to do it and somehow it
got leaked and we got caught
before we actually robbed the
bank, we'd be able to be charged
with conspiracy, wouldn't we?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman that's
giving.
Us up here
Law school.
PTSD we talk about that for
months, but, um, theoretically
it would be a attempted
attempted conspiracy, but if the
car breaks down on the way to
the bank, I think, I think you
beat the rap.
You know
I have to get a good lawyer.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think I have
the floor through this lovely
conversation and there was no
answer to the is it 2nd degree
or is it 3rd degree? Because it
says both.
Am I out to lunch here? Aren't
people reading the same thing?
Not
Not him.
You.
All right. Uh, so, so folks, so
Senator Stewart's asking the
question. I've relied on the
assistance of our staff,
Senator, to try and answer your
question.
So, and I think Senator, uh,
my was making the same
explanation, but let me try it a
little different way. So in that
subparagraph after that you're
reading on page 7, it is a lower
felony, a 3rd degree felony
because it involves only the
conspiring to commit the
offense.
Whereas the two offenses in page
6 subparagraphs B and C, it's
actually committing the offense.
So in BNC they're actually
committing the racketeering
activity, and that's why it's a
higher penalty as a second
degree, whereas in the paragraph
is a lower level felony because
you're only conspiring, not
actually committing the crime.
OK. Does that make any sense?
Yes, it does. I think that's
what was saying as well. I still
think that we have to clean up
that the uh and she
cause it's not accurate, but all
those numbers
and come to you, Senator.
Uh, uh, well, I'll, I'll listen
to Senator Duheg. I got to
listen to every lawyer in the
room, so you have your full
panoply of options.
Thank you, Senator.
Miss Chas get us because we
took.
The substance of changes out of
section C there, and now we just
have this clean up.
We should just strike all of
section C.
That would, that would make more
sense cause then we don't have
to clean up the letters on page
7. The only changes made
otherwise is instead of whoever
saying a person who.
Um, I think it's, it's cleaner
and easier just to strike,
strike slipssection C, because
we've already stricken.
The actual substantive changes
to it already.
And then we don't have to do a
more extended.
Amendment.
Doing the cleanups on page 7 of
those letters.
And remembering stuff reline.
Yes, I moved to strike
subsection C. and, and can I,
could I, so we've already made
that other amendment, instead
of, I don't know if it is too
late.
For us to withdraw the amendment
that we made, but I think it was
cleaner for us just to strike
subsection C.
I mean, 33. Thank you.
No, no, no, no, so section 3 of
the bill starting on page 5.
Right it just wouldn't be part
of the bill.
Exactly. There's no reason for
that whole section to be part of
the bill because of the changes
we've made.
all
Yes.
Yes.
Right, right.
So.
Cause now we're not changing
anything, so I cleans it up and
makes it easier.
prefer they start as 2.5 pages,
so I'm fine with that.
So Mr. Chair, if I.
I, I have a, in a, in a
different bill, I, I have a
definition of a stash house and
would like to get that included
and
With the penalties being, I
think, a 3rd degree as well.
And I, and
If we're, if we're doing a
committee substitute and and I
can offer that up to you and I
still.
leave it in the hands of this
group. I'm not quite sure. I
don't have it with me today. Um.
But there is a definition
mustache house that I wasn't
including in a separate bill.
They do the same thing
essentially. And if, if
They're open to that, I can
offer that up and
And you can include that as one
of the definitions to include in
your racket field
somewhere.
It is not. That is the that is
the question you can't add it
into here because this is
specifically dealing with
racketeering, all of these
things are already against the
law.
The big difference is that
they're being added to
racketeering act.
To allow there to be another
place if it's an organization
doing it instead of just a
couple.
Instead of just one person
stashing drugs at a stash house.
Um, that I think that would
really confuse it and muck it
up. We need to get that into law
first.
Then it could be added to this.
Did I get that right?
Yeah, I told you I might be able
to past the bar. Well, you've
been here a lot longer than I
have, so I will prefer and.
You said that.
Uh, so
But
I support the motion, but you
should also look at the title.
Something we always forget.
I'm pretty sure it's just
prescribing penalties that needs
to be deleted, but perhaps
creating crimes cause we're not
creating any, we're adding.
Basically changing the
definition of what's in a
racketeering law.
Yes, so my emotion is on page
one, line 12.
strike, uh, from the semicolon.
Uh, up through penalties on line
13 and then strike section 3.
Yes.
Me
Oh
The comment, Mr. Chairman,
before it becomes irrelevant,
but
On, on, on to to conspire. Well,
no, because I'm gonna, no, cause
I'm gonna dress up a paragraph
that we're gonna strike. Ah,
conspire this committee is, is
considering conspire as planning
or plotting or attempting, no
conspiracy is simply working in
concert with another person to
commit a crime. So to conspire.
Kidnapping, you and I commit
kidnapping, we're kidnapping and
conspiracy. The thing about
racketeering is by definition,
the crime of racketeering is a
conspiracy. So that's probably
why that weird paragraph is in
there talking about conspiracy,
a 3rd degree crime, so that it's
not double jeopardy.
Thank you. And then some of my
clients can take my advice some
plants.
Can not believe me.
Right, well
we do pass.
I move do not pass the Senate
Bill 70, and a due pass on the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70
with all of our agreed upon
amendments.
Just a little more discussion. I
always said share go last so I
haven't had that opportunity
yet. Um, I, I'm gonna pause.
Hard and again, all due respect
to the animal rights people and
I, I, I don't want to refight a
cockfighting, uh, uh argument
because we've debated that for
probably 20 years, I think.
Um, cockfighting still takes
place and um adding that to list
of racketeering crimes.
His
It would be a potential problem
again, I, I deplore it and I
voted against the cop fighting
ban and fought to um to ban
cockfighting, uh, getting a
number of people together, 2
people together to engage in
cockfighting, become make some
second degree felons, it's
pretty harsh sentence.
Uh, for again a deplorable
crime, um.
The um, the important thing for
me in in all this discussion is
probably the recognition I think
Senator Maestas made and perhaps
others, which is we have this
racketeering law and we never
use it, right? Uh, so we can add
crimes and we can amend it and
we can we'll we'll, and this is
not a reflection of you center
or criticism of you we'll all
pat ourselves on the back and
we'll have a press conference
and we'll say we strengthen the
racketeering law, but if we're
not using it and we're not
prosecuting, we're not charging
people with it, and we're again
shining.
On ourselves and the public at
large, the um the this is not,
this doesn't always win me
points, but I say this with
greatest respect for the chief
in the back and law enforcement
in the room and those who are
watching. The greatest example
that I know of of late for what
would be captured by this crime
is our law enforcement.
Right, so existing racketeering.
Uh, crimes include bribery.
Existing racketeering crimes
include illegal kickbacks.
Existing racketeering crimes
include extortion. They're all
on the list of crimes now. I
read the papers.
Um, I read the the plea
agreements, um, involving APD.
Um
Bribery
Yeah.
Clearly.
Illegal kickbacks, clearly.
Extortion, clearly.
So, we've got the people that
are supposed to be, are, are,
uh, and, and who we trust and
should trust to be enforcing our
laws, and at least in my
perspective, the most noteworthy
and public examples of
racketeering activity are taking
place at APD.
Um
And
The individuals under existing
law involved in that are.
Uh liable to a second degree
felony.
harsh penalties and my
expectation is, nobody's gonna
prosecute him.
My expectation is our attorney
general is not going to
prosecute him, uh, district
attorney's not going to
prosecute him. I could be wrong.
The feds, well, you're right,
the feds, but, but what a shame
that we have to go to the feds,
right? And we hear that all the
time.
Uh, we need to go to the feds to
do pretrial detention because
the state won't do it. Let's go
to the feds, let's, uh,
prosecute, you know, under
federal law cause it's uh more
reliable, swifter, certain
penalties. Uh, we can't rely on
the state to do it. We, we are
the state, folks.
That's us.
On this
You know, at this rostrum, we're
responsible then you senator
we're responsible for the state
laws and for the state
prosecutions, and I've got to
sit here and go, we've known
about this, at least from the
press, we've known about it for
2 years and I'm, I'm pretty sure
many people have known about
this for, this has gone on for
what, 2 decades, at least our
understanding,
at least 20 years.
Um, so why don't we be straight
with one another, right? And,
and I, and I know you want to be
straight, and I, I think my
colleagues up here want straight
and all due respect for the law
enforcement here. I think they
want um the the bad players out,
right? And, and I don't want to
see, uh, I don't know, I don't
know that I need to see these
cops do 2 degree felonies.
What's the penalty for second
degree felony?
9 years. Yeah, do, do these, do
these, uh, cops, law enforcement
officers, the attorney involved,
there's people in my profession
involved too, can't escape.
Yeah. I'm not just pointing the
finger at law enforcement. A
shame on my, on my profession,
right? Uh, and, um, and do they
need to do 9 years? I don't
really necessarily know that
that's the case. Well, you may,
and we can debate that, but, and
that's probably for a jury or
somebody else to say, but let's
not be, let's not ignore.
What we're doing here, which is
the best example of racketeering
is the people in charge of our
law enforcement right now.
Uh
group was caught for human
trafficking.
And that one's also going
through the federal courts
because it's not in our RICO
statute. And that's what the
DA's, when they
Brought this, they said this is
they said this was the most
important piece of legislation
for him.
Where they're at, but um, yeah,
they, they really wanted this
change, you know, well it is
Saturday and I thought about
staying home too, but I had a
job to do.
Hey, the salary we're drawing
makes it worth showing up,
doesn't it? Yeah, I mean, yeah.
I think we get it whether we're
here or not get paid
we don't, so uh and the other
the the law enforcement example,
um, I think what Senator Stewart
was signing to say is that that
started with the FBI.
So that case started in the
federal circle to begin with.
The whole investigation's been
the FBI, not local police or
state police.
And I think part of the concern
and why it was started there was
what we've seen is now involves
at least one state police
officer who was an APD then and
and uh er's deputy.
You know
You share stuff it's right.
Well, I, I hope my comments are
never misconstrued because the
deputy chief is here and I have
the greatest respect for him.
He's been terrific. He's been
here for all of our meetings day
in and day out, and, and I say
other law enforcement, we have
the greatest respect for those
of you guys who are doing the
job and it's a hard job, and,
and we want to support you every
way we can, but we also can't uh
ignore things, um, and I think,
and I think that's wrong of us
to, to pretend that some things
that are right in front of our
face, we won't talk about.
We won't accept and and we won't
uh try and correct, right? Um,
and, and I don't know how we get
our handle on crime in the state
of New Mexico. We won't accept
the the log in our own eye is
the, to, to, uh, your, your
profession, Senator, uh, I, I
read the gospel a little bit
myself and uh you know, take,
take the log out of your own
eye, right? Um,
and uh
what's that? to the out of your
brother's. Well, give me the,
give me the, give me, give it to
me straight cause I, I, I'm
I'm giving you the Catholic
version, which we always kind of
simplify things a little bit,
but what, what is the proper,
can you give, can you cite to
the gospel for me. I can't tell
you chapter and verse, but it's
before you try to remove a speck
from your brother's eye, take
the log out of your own eye
first. That's, that's exactly
what I'm talking about, right?
Where we take the log out, look
at the speck in your own, so
anyway, uh, not to get too
preachy on a Saturday, we have
that for Sunday, but, but we
should recognize that if we're
talking about Rico and bribery
and kickbacks and.
Uh, illegal kickbacks and
bribery and extortion.
Right in front of us, right?
Absolutely.
All right. Uh, I'm not gonna try
and make the amendment on uh
cockfighting cause I, I don't
want to go there, but I, I also
recognize the fact the reality
is that prosecutors aren't
prosecuting that, probably never
will. And so I'm just gonna rely
on the judicial discretion and,
and leave um the the legislative
intent that they would do so for
something like cockfighting, we
take that as serious. All right,
we're on do pass motion for the
committee sub as amended. Thank
you all for letting me espouse
uh my feelings and thoughts, but
I think somebody's got to say
it.
Thank you to the committee for
helping me work on this bill. Is
there any objection to do pass
motion for the committee sub on
Senate 70.
See none, Senator, thank you. If
we do pass.
Good work.
on the floor.
Preach there. We have uh Senator
Woods.
We're all, we're all worked up,
fired up. It would.
Mr. Chairman, while he's coming
up, uh, 3 houses down from me on
Moon Street in Albuquerque, one
of my neighbors has a 12.
Uh, roosters.
That he's uh
Growing in his backyard.
Uh, my neighbor looked over the
fence to look at them.
I kind of like the sound in the
morning when I get up early and
go outside, I feel like I'm in
Mexico cause I hear all the cock
a doodle doing, but I'm pretty
sure that that is a precursor
for something else cause what
can you do with 12 roosters in
your backyard other than sell
them to people.
Thank you. Yeah like.
Well, Senator, those, those of
us that come from Mexican
ancestry, Hispanic ancestry, uh,
always are familiar with the
expression about having two
roosters in the hen house is a
problem. So if you've got 10 or
12 of them in your neighbor's
backyard.
Well, there's, yeah, you may be
worrying they're not producing
eggs over there, I guess, right?
So, all right.
All right. Very good. Sarah
Woods.
Senate 70. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, we've got 56, I'm sorry, 56.
I hope that's one. That's who I
brought in with me. You're good.
Thank you. OK.
You know, farmers are ranchers
are among those businesses that
are the most highly regulated.
They're required to report more
information about their business
than almost any other industry.
For good reason, they feed the
world and ensure safe food is of
uttermost importance.
However, their natural.
Distrust
Of government
Makes them very careful.
Of what they share because of
how it may be used against them.
And sometimes
In a hurry to hustle him around.
Where they are not required to
share that information that
would otherwise be helpful.
They often choose not to.
protection for themselves and
their families.
Encouraging voluntary
information, Cherry.
Improves access to healthy and
safe food.
Farmers and ranchers are not
asking for anything special
here.
That would
Protect them more than it would
protect the public.
Most of the public do not have
to tell anyone about their
business operations and nowhere
near what farmers and ranchers
are required to shear.
This is a public interest bill.
It would protect the ag producer
in the public simultaneously.
If a producer is not required to
share information.
But knows he can help resolve an
issue.
He remain protected if he does
share the information.
We see
Increase cooperation and a safer
food supply.
Agritarism is real.
The pressure and risk to farmers
and ranchers face this high.
On a 10 year cycle, and ag
producer will make money. 3
years.
Lose money 3 years.
Break even 3 years.
And pray the 10th years or at
least a break even.
If an ag producer doesn't make
it.
The banks and private equity
firms soon acquire those
interests.
And
are willing to take them over,
encouraging and supporting
agriculture producers, success
is vital.
But often they fear coming into
to the government for help
because they are
Shown to be a villain.
This bill would encourage their
participation.
We don't ask Target and Walmart,
the local ice cream shop or the
local delivery service about
their supplies, stocks.
Quantity health of employees.
And so on.
Asking farmers this kind of
sensitive information and
letting the puppet public
misinterpreted.
Due to lack of knowledge of the
industry is dangerous.
Well I protects business, but
not our local businesses.
This bill is an attempt.
A proper balance of interest,
but it also leaves discretion
with the livestock board to say
no, you're a bad actor, and this
information is not protected.
On the whole, it will encourage
participation by the good
actors.
This bill is like giving
journalism, the ability to
protect information from
continential informants or
police who can do the same thing
during investigation.
Eventually, the public interest
may be overridden by
confidentiality, but during an
investigation, probably not.
As in the case of criminal
proceedings and journalism.
Why would we give journalists
more flexibility to provide us
with the news, then we give
farmers and ranchers who provide
our.
I'm gonna, I'm going to
Except questions, Mister Chair.
Those are the statements I'm
making.
I'm sure that uh
My, my two expert witnesses can,
can answer any questions you
might have.
Those are the reasons I bring
the bill forward. This is an
agency.
Bill, although it is.
Can't be put on there in agency
bill because the governor didn't
give her a stamp of approval, so
I'm just gonna bring that
forward right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. All right.
And Senator, we've got 3
individuals who signed up to
speak and support one in
opposition, uh, Tom Patterson,
uh, first up.
Marshall Wilson and then Kelly
Fajardo, all recognize each of
you all. I don't see Miss
Fajardo.
You, yes, you are back to
writing, um.
We recognize each for up to 2
minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members. My name is Tom
Patterson. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers supports SB 56.
This bill is about keeping our
food system in New Mexico City.
The bill has its genesis in the
detection,
investigation and handling of
the bird flu outbreak we had
last spring in eastern New
Mexico, our dairy herds and
poultry operations.
Producers understandably are
reluctant to provide information
on what they're encountering.
When a release of that
information in response to a
document request may lead to the
disclosure of their personal and
confidential information.
But her state veterinarian needs
the information to do a proper
investigation and undertake
steps to control disease.
This bill balances the tension
between the need.
The concern and transparency.
The bill authorizes our state
veterinarian react only limited
personal and confidential
information when she responds to
a document request.
No one wants to pay $10 for a
dozen eggs.
Or pay the surcharge today at
Loudeberger for a breakfast
burrito if it has eggs in it.
Those are real world
consequences of the bird flu,
and it could get worse.
Since last fall, we face the
critical threat of the flesh
eating new world screw worm on
our southern border. This winter
we detected yet another strain
of bird flu. This week, bird flu
wiped out more than 90% of a
backyard flock in the North
Valley.
All of those incidents
underscore why we need this
bill.
Senate Bill 56 will help protect
our food supply to keep it safe
for our people, please, we ask
for your favorable
consideration.
Thank you, Marshall Wilson or
Mr. Fajardo, I had Marshall
Wilson next signed up, don't see
anybody stepping for it, Miss
Fajardo for the Farm Bureau.
Up to 2 minutes, please and
members of the committee and
Kelly Fajardo on behalf of the
New Mexico Farm Bureau. We are
standing here in strong support
of Senate Bill 56, a critical
measure that strengthens New
Mexico's livestock industry by
ensuring the confidentiality of
sensitive operational
information during um disease
investigations. This bill
encourages greater participation
from livestock producers are
protecting their private data,
such as herd locations, movement
patterns, and biosecurity plans.
The bill enhances our ability to
identify and contain disease
outbreaks, ensuring the safety
of our food supply. Other states
like Texas and Colorado have
already adopted similar
protections by passing SB 56 New
Mexico aligns itself with best
practices, reinforcing our
agricultural economy, while
keeping our livestock industry
competitive and secure. The bill
strikes a fair balance and shows
confidential information while
still allowing necessary
transparency. Thank you, members
of the committee.
Mr. Wilson, can you hear me,
sir? Yes, sir. Can you hear me?
Yes, up to 2 minutes you're
live.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to
comment on this proposed
legislation. My name is Marsha
Wilson, and I serve as the
co-director of the Southwest
Border Food Protection and
Emergency Preparedness Center.
In this role, I assist in
planning and responding to
emergencies affecting
agriculture, including animal
health events.
Senate Bill 56 addresses
critical challenges identified
during past emergency responses.
Most recently, the H5N1 outbreak
in dairy cattle has already
referenced by previous speakers.
At its core, the bill
strengthens the New Mexico
Livestock Board's ability to
protect the food supply chain
while promoting business
continuity for our farms and
ranches.
It achieves this by safeguarding
biosecurity details and
personally identifiable
information of our farmers and
ranchers.
Timely and accurate information
sharing is essential for an
effective crisis response.
Senate Bill 56 encourages this
by promoting voluntary
voluntarily shared information
while ensuring the New Mexico
Livestock board can continue to
coordinate effectively with
other state and federal response
partners.
I think the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward, and I thank
the committee for taking it
under consideration.
Thank you. Royal on Zoom.
Good
afternoon, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Felice Rael. I'm a
trial, hello.
Thank you so much. I'm a trial
lawyer based in Albuquerque,
although I do handle cases
around the state, um, I
understand that um there's a
good public policy reason to
encourage the sharing of
information. It's a little
disheartening to
hear that there may be business
owners who are not willing to
share information. Certainly,
uh, the ranchers that I know
take public safety very
seriously. The reason I'm, I, I
oppose this bill or the
committee substitute is because
I think that in New Mexico
citizen, um could be harmed, and
or maybe their own animals are
harmed, and I think that the
confidentiality provisions in
this bill, uh, take a lot of
rights.
away from a New Mexico citizen
who's harmed or who have their
own animals harmed. And I think
it's important to balance the
rights of those New Mexico
citizens against the need for
more information. Information is
good. The sharing of information
is good and we shouldn't take
those rights away from New
Mexico citizens. Thank you so
much you add something in
response.
No, I'm ready. All right, very
good.
Committee members with questions
and comments.
Senator O'Malley
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Talk about confidential
information.
Did you explain, I mean, just
what, what are we talking about
here? I mean, if they're, you
know, if there's an
investigation or there's an
outbreak of some kind.
And, uh, you know, the
inspectors want to know.
You know, they need they need
information.
What are you, what are you
saying that they should not
have.
And
the veterinarian.
So, Samantha, introduce
yourself.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair,
and, um, members of the
committee. My name is Samantha
Hollick, and the state
veterinarian with the New Mexico
Lives.org.
We're, we're not asking or we're
not um.
It, it is not withholding
information from the inspectors.
Um, the, the information that
we're trying to keep
confidential is information that
we would obtain in an
investigation.
It literally is identifying
information, so names,
addresses, things that are
required to be reported to us.
And in the process of a public
records request, that
information could be released.
And we, we just don't want that
information used incorrectly due
to public records release. I
mean, it, it would be.
Equivalent to a HIPA violation.
Or a human medical condition.
That that's the only.
Protection we're asking for with
this.
And Mr. Chair, I would think
that other other producers would
want to know.
This information in terms of,
I'm just thinking, you know,
supply chain and things like
that.
Um
What would you be redacting
somebody's name?
Uh, I mean, then I would someone
know.
That person, you know, where
that ranch was or whatever. I
don't know enough about it, but
I'm just, you know, saying those
kinds of things.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and Senator
O'Malley, just to give some
perspective when we do pursue a
disease investigation, for
example, part of our response
process is to notify producers
in the area and to work with
them to help them understand the
risk to these other producers
and the industry, this.
It that that's part of the
process of.
Trying to identify where the
disease is.
And control it.
The problem that we're faced
with is it it's already in
statute that disease is required
to be reported and it's
punishable by misdemeanor if it
is not.
Problem is the fear of
repercussions of reporting a
disease outweigh the fear of
that misdemeanor.
We're trying to encourage
producers to come forward. When
I had the influenza, um.
Impacted our dairy industry,
there was a lot of fear, first
of all, because we didn't know
what the disease was, we knew
dairy cattle were impacted, but
there were a lot of really great
minds working on this disease,
trying to understand what the
agent was, whether it was viral
bacterial toxic.
And before we even knew that we
had producers who were known to
be affected and afraid to come
forward.
And that made it
More challenging for us to try
to understand the disease, how
far and widespread it was and
what the impact was to the
industry.
Mr. Chair, I can certainly
understand how, you know,
something could get out and
before you know it, it's
Uh, misinterpreted and, and, you
know, I, you know, someone
pointed out that
You don't want to make villains
out of people who are great, you
know, basically producing our
food.
I do have concerns about that,
and we're talking about small
businesses, things like that.
I'm just not sure how you
balance that, because
You know, uh,
Again, you're producing for the
public, right? And
You know, I mean, we're
consumers, so it was, we need to
know these things too, so.
I think it's a really
You know, it's difficult, a
difficult deal.
That's all I have to say.
Questions or two.
I, I hesitate to do this because
I came in late, but listening to
the discussion just now. I was,
I was gonna make a motion to the
table.
Let's not use that to cut off
the page just yet, but that'll
be the next motion that we take
under myestus.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Senators, so just so I, I
reading the bill and I couldn't
understand the policy reason
behind it, but I was reading the
FIR and and.
But it's saying is that this
distance, the current law.
Or the lack of this law,
disincentivizes testing and
reporting of this of of a
disease outbreak, so.
So let's say I'm a rancher, my
cows are sick, I wouldn't tell
anyone because if I told someone
that would become IRable and
then it would hurt my business
or what, what's the, what's the?
Problem we're trying to solve.
Well, um,
uh Mr. Chair.
Senator Maestas, I'm Belinda
Garland. I'm the executive
director for the Livestock
Board. What we're trying to do
with this bill is encourage
farmers and ranchers to come
forward when there was an issue,
um, it's like the old saying, I
can't fix it if I don't know
what's wrong.
So if they don't come forward
and tell us that they've got.
The dairy cows, for example, in
the beginning, we didn't have
any idea what that was in those
in those dairy cattle.
So if they don't come forward
and tell us, then we can't help
them resolve the issue and get
control of whatever outbreak is
happening at the time, so it's
really not, I know this bill
sounds, it's all about
protecting the producer, which
it is some of that, but this is
really about protecting the food
supply.
So the more
People that we have coming
forward telling us we have this
problem, then we can get out
there and protect the other
people that are producing maybe
the same product.
A good example of that is that
we have, um, when we have a
flock outbreak on this avian
flu, we take task force and we
go around the community and we
get flyers, we talk to them, we
tell them what's what to watch
for in their flocks and make
sure that none of their flock is
sick.
So this is all about um getting
people to come forward so we can
help them control what's
happening plus protect the
people around them.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
generally, and so the reluctance
to come forward today is what?
So, um, Mr. Chair, Senator Maest
is the reluctance is the false
prosecution. I, I can see it
out. They, they're out there,
they're wanting to take
pictures. A good example is we
had to euthanize some horses,
people are filming it, they're
wanting pictures, they're
wanting to put post, um, post it
on Facebook.
You know, that can be
misconstrued that this is a bad
handler of this horse when
really it's not his fault. I
mean, nobody wants their horse
to come down with coins where
they have to be euthanized.
So we're trying to just get the
people to come forward to we're
not, we're not releasing their
personal information. I can tell
you as a rancher, if I have an
outbreak on my ranch, I'm
concerned about getting my
animals taken care of. I don't
want to deal with 50 people
standing at my gate with
cameras.
So, uh, Senator Woods, so you're
suggesting with this bill, it'll
create good public policy
because folks won't be reluctant
to come forward. They'll come
forward earlier with no
reservations so that any uh
disease or problem on the ranch
won't go to adjacent ranches and
hurt the hurt.
Hurt the food supply.
Mr. Chair, Senator my that, that
is correct. Thank you.
Um, I'd like to join the debate
before we take the motion that
was before us, so I, I, Senator,
you know, I oppose this in
conservation committee for
reasons that I expressed there.
I, I do generally always try and
error in favor.
A transparency, public
transparency, and so precluding
information that would be
available to a state agency, uh,
the livestock Board or others
and and making that
confidential, uh, is, I, I go
and look at that with a um
Presumption against, right, uh,
any, any effort to preclude
transparency. The uh
The examples that I can think of
we've seen in in recent years
have been outbreaks among uh
poultry, uh, hog farms.
Cattle farms and so forth. And
I, I think the public has a
right to know when that happens.
Um, I can understand some
thinking that if we don't tell
the public about this, that
there won't be an economic harm,
and that's obvious, right, if if
you don't know this is
happening, there's not gonna be
an economic harm. And if the
public does know about it,
there's going to be an economic
horror. And, and, and I regret
that you and I've been advocates
for agriculture.
All the way through this thing,
farming ranch and that's my,
that's my uh.
Legacy, that's my heritage, and
that's how I still earn a
living, but I, I do think that
the public has a right to know,
and this bill would preclude,
there's an outbreak, uh, among
cattle or poultry.
Or hogs or whatever else, the
public wouldn't be entitled to
know um the numbers of livestock
involved, so that would tell me
whether it's a big outbreak or a
small outbreak.
It wouldn't be entitled to know
the locations of livestock. Is
it in New Mexico or is it
someplace else?
They wouldn't be entitled to
know the movement of livestock
or the purchase or sale of that
livestock or or uh whatever it
may be, poultry or, or swine.
I think, I think that that uh
Uh, although we're trying to
protect the economic interests,
we should just say well that's
what it is, we're trying to
protect it on an economic
outbreak. I, I, I don't compare
this to HIPA to HIPA violation
where you were protecting a
patient's confidential medical
records. I think we're trying to
protect the public health in the
best possible way. I appreciate
that you're, you're thinking
this is a good protection for
public health because it'll
encourage people to come
forward, and I think that that
that might be the case. I don't
think you want to give too much
attention to the argument that
was made earlier that, well, uh,
Because it's only a misdemeanor,
they'd rather take the
misdemeanor and not come
forward. Well, that's not a good
argument because then that maybe
means we should increase the
penalties for not disclosing
this, uh, from a misdemeanor to
a higher level of crime, and I
don't think that's the solution
either. I think we want people
to come forward with it and and
um and be able to respond, and
sometimes that response means
the public saying we're not
going to buy a particular uh uh
chicken from a particular
poultry farmer for a time, and
I, I do that when you, when I
heard there's an outbreak of, of
uh poultry from a certain
producer.
Um, at Sam's Club or whatever so
I don't go by, I make a
purposeful effort not to buy
that poultry, and there's an
economic impact, I realize that
that that provider, but um uh I
think that it's important that I
know that, and I, and I would be
unhappy to know that the
government knew about it, but
felt that they didn't have to
tell me or tell the public or
tell anybody else about it. So
uh uh for those reasons, I've
opposed your bill before and
I'll continue to do it here
today.
Those are my comments, uh,
anyone else before we take the
motion before us.
Right, the motion center doing,
the tabling motion. We'll do it
by a roll call, please, on the
motionless the table.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Stewart.
Senator?
No, the table.
or worse.
And my.
Senator Cervantes.
So those table. Thank you, thank
you all for your presentation.
Uh, committee members, I think
the last one is mine.
It's an appropriation bill.
You OK? Yeah, yeah.
number one.
Oh, it's the last one on our
agenda, 504.
You want a motion, Mr. Chair
I'd move it too fast.
Thank you all.
Thank you. Yeah.
Yeah, you got to take a vote on
the motion.
Thank you, uh, thank you, uh,
sponsor of Senator Wirth,
there's a motion on the table to
uh to uh to move the uh San bill
any discussion.
Any opposition to the DuPass
motion, please note all those
present voting in favor, you
have a due pass on 504 of
apologies to the folks who
wanted to speak on this, but,
but you were definitely hurt.
Um,
first of all, before we recess,
I want to thank everybody for
being here on a Saturday. We
won't meet tomorrow, but don't
get used to it, uh, for the
newer members, we will, uh,
Senator Paul, Senator Thornton,
to get used to the idea we will
periodically be looking at
meeting on Sundays, so I, I
wanted to make sure that
everybody got the the Bible
verse, it's Matthew, uh, chapter
7, verse 3 through 5, I commend
everyone to reading it, it's a,
it's a good lesson to us, it
talks about hypocrisy and it.
talks about uh much criticizing
the spec in your neighbor's eye
or your brother's eye when the
plank is in your own, and so,
uh, there's the there's uh that
gets you out of Sunday
attendance for the committee and
you all get enjoy your Sunday
off. Uh, thank you for the good
work we're getting through a lot
of bills. We're trying really
hard to schedule them in a way
that those that have less
controversy are within these
limited times today we had only
3 hours, so we'll save the the
bigger issues for uh Monday, we
we will do guns.
Um, and so expect a long meeting
Monday, all right, and probably
true Wednesday as well too.
That's right.
That's right. It's, it's, I
