Will will be meeting for the
last 10 minutes or so of the
hour will study on what we call
organization or staff.
And hoping the committee get
oriented to what we're going to
be doing this session, but
The first matter before us today
is a hearing on a very specific
topic. I thought it was
important for us to note a few
things. This is a presidential
election year. Of course, um,
this will be that you want and
only opportunity that the
Legislature has to meet before
it passed any legislation last
time that happened. There were
some
Absurdities from my perspective,
But however, you want to
characterize it. There were some
Very unusual circumstances about
how the electoral process work
from historical precedents.
By what is often referred to as
fake electors.
Interestingly, Mexico factor
prominently into the fake elect
Hand recently, the attorney
general indicated position to
prosecute crimes. And so I've
been invited the tree little bit
about why that's true and what
occurred leading into his
analysis and investigation.
We've also invited the secretary
of state here today as well,
too, and I think it's important
to recognize
People like Senator do it
because the vice chair Senator
Ivey Soto, whose to my laughers
who on this committee worked
very, very hard for the years to
try and protect the sanctity of
the vote, and and in all
respects, and and it almost
seems get once again absurd to
me that we make the efforts to
worry about the hours and the
ballot locations and all of
these things like gun presence
of guns at polling locations. We
do all these things and yet
You can show up evidently and
have a whole different slate of
electors voting so the recently
when the attorney general and
get there would be no
prosecutions. I was somewhat
surprised that there was frankly
so little attention paid in the
middle public to have a full
hearing. What? I don't know
whether
Secretary of state to keep
calling you Attorney General. I
know that the correct any longer
but
It's gonna take me a long time
to get used to calling you. Did
you do the one of the two of you
have a preference about who will
go first?
Hmm. Well, thank you very much,
actually Thought
Yeah, I do.
Can you hear me?
Keep an eye on that one, Mr.
Chair. Uh, um I wasn't expecting
to see a whole lot of this
committee this year, but
Couldn't have predicted. I'd be
the first skinny pig, but I'm
happy to be here. Mr. Chair.
Thank you and the committee for
inviting the attorney general,
And I just speak today. Um
I think as I understand it. What
I've been asked to do is do a
couple of things first of all,
to kind of lay a groundwork. Um,
I'm not going to read through,
uh, article 15 of the election
code that addresses. Uh, the
selection of presidential
electors in New Mexico and the
process we go through, but we
can all level set as to
To what is that process? I do
think most people
Um, no no of the electoral
college, but it's kind of this
mythical thing that we don't
really know what it is or how it
works in every state is a little
bit different. Um, just as as it
is with how we run our
elections. But here in New
Mexico
In a nutshell. The way this
works is at state conventions
held in the year, 2024 qualified
political parties will nominate
five presidential electors from
the voters of their party wife
five because we have three
representatives and two United
States senators for a total of
five electoral cult.
Ah within 63 days, the chair and
secretary of the convention
certify the nominees to my
office.
Um, once those have been picked,
um and then we have the
election.
And the voters cast here in New
Mexico a vote for a slate of
president together on the same
ballot line. Um and whoever is
certified to be the winner three
weeks after Election Day at our
state canvas state border canvas
meeting those electoral college
votes for New Mexico are awarded
to the electors of the party of
the victor.
So in 2020, President Joe Biden
and Vice President Kamala Harris
were awarded those five
Democratic party's five electors
convened here in the state
capital. My role of the
secretary of state's role is to
convene the electors. We do it
here in the capital. Uh, it's a
light Web streamed process. So
anybody who wants to can watch
it.
And my role is to convene them
and to provide basically
clerical support. Um they follow
the steps as required in statute
and by federal law to go
through, actually casting a
ballot.
Uh, in New Mexico, Uh, the
electoral college voters, the
electors are required to vote
for the person that that their
party nominated and that one so
Like In some states, you hear
stories of what they call
faithless electors voting for a
different candidate or
something. We don't allow that
here. If that were to happen, it
would be my job to call the
party and get a backup elector
in to cast a ballot for the
winning candidates.
Um, we did that on December 14th
to 2020 pursuant to state law if
you will recall at the time we
were still in the midst of the
Covid 19 pandemic, this building
was basically locked down.
Um, but we were required by law
to have the process. The
electoral college electors for
New Mexico meet here in the
capital. So we did convene them
here. Wasn't this exact
committee room? I think it was a
couple doors down. Um
And the Democratic Party's
electors came, um
As we were kind of gearing up to
gavel in the meeting, actually
got a text message director of
the Republican Party, uh, person
who also, uh, became identified
as one of these so called fake
collectors and this, uh, for 10
in, um and she simply text me
and asked, Can we come into the
meeting?
Um, so that the Republican
electors quote unquote can can
cast their ballots, too. And I
was kind of caught off guard. I
thought, Wow, that's really
weird. I've never heard of
anything like that. And I very
respectfully replied that
unfortunately, no, um that to
the best of my knowledge that
that wouldn't be a legal part of
the process. Um so no, we
weren't gonna let them
Into the building. My
understanding is they can, uh,
later understanding is that they
convened outside the building.
But we did do the normal process
with the Democratic Party
electors here. We, uh,
appropriately certified. Those
documents sent them to the
appropriate folks in the federal
government, uh, with all of the
attest stations and those, of
course, were the votes Go on
January 6th 2021, I will say And
then this is where I'm gonna
hand it over here in just a sec
to Mr Attorney General.
Um
You know, I didn't think a whole
lot of it at the time when I
received that request.
For a slate of Republican
electors to come because it had
already been such a wacky and
wild election was so many
Unusual things that had
occurred. I just chalked it up
to you know, this is this is a
political stunt, You know, Um
It wasn't until later that day
that we received notice that
former President Trump had filed
a lawsuit trying to overturn the
results of the presidential
election that had been certified
weeks previous
Um, So that happened later that
day, which was another piece in
the puzzle.
Um, and it wasn't until almost a
full year later.
That I became aware that
Uh, similar activities to what
happened here. Um, I had no idea
that it was part of a bigger,
coordinated process and I really
scratched my head wondering why
it had even occurred here in New
Mexico, where President Biden
had won the election by over
100,000 votes. Um, and it only
occurred to me later that, uh,
Mr Eastman John Eastman, who was
sort of the mastermind if you
will, behind the the plan, at
least as far as the news is, has
told us lives here, of course in
Santa Fe, and maybe that's why
we were included in the mix. And
I know Mr Attorney General, you
know, can probably speak more to
that. Um, but that's sort of
once we became aware of the
coordinated effort. Um, that's
where we felt. Oh, gosh.
We should make sure we're doing
our diligence, referred it to
then Attorney investigated. Uh
and, um, you know, he he sort of
kept in touch with us. Told us
he was working with the U. S
attorney's office. And then
when, um, now current attorney
General Torres came in shortly
after you came into office. Mr.
Attorney General. Um, you you
followed up with me and my team
and said, Hey, you know, um,
What's the story with this? Um
You know, I sort of feel
obligated to look into it. And
and so it's been in the attorney
General's Mr Chairman, members
of the committee first I wanna
thank the committee for giving
us an opportunity to provide a
broader context.
Ah to the findings and the
conclusions that are set forth
in the final report that we
submitted
Um, based on the brief outline
that was provided just now by
the secretary of state, but but
more importantly, on a pretty
exhaustive and comprehensive
criminal investigation that was
initiated by Sean Sullivan, a
career prosecutor in my office.
Um, I see that copies of that
final report should be
distributed to members of the
committee now.
Um and I will defer to Mr
Sullivan to to dig into some of
the I think really important
details.
Of, um
You know some of the facts that
we knew at the time, But more
importantly, a lot of the facts
that that have developed, um
over the intervening period of
time.
Um, I want to acknowledge an
important thing that I think the
important that the committee
should be aware is going to
change from this point, moving
forward.
For whatever reason, my
predecessor when he was made
aware that the meeting had
occurred and that these
documents had been submitted to
the president of the Senate and
had deferred action, um on that
conduct, based on a referral
that he had made to the
Department of Justice, and I
think, as we all know the the
The gears of the Department of
Justice at the at the national
level, have moved very slowly in
uncovering and revealing the
underlying details and and sort
of legal rationale, I guess
behind, um, what I can say what
I consider to be a conspiracy
and and, frankly, a profound
threat to our democracy that
said.
Um, I want to make sure that,
um the committee understands my
perspective on it, which is
despite my concern about the
nature of this conduct in
general, and about the corrosive
effect that I think this conduct
has on the faith of the public
in our institutions of
government.
Um, I nevertheless instructed,
Mr Sullivan, um and other
members of his investigatory
team to treat this frankly like
we would any other criminal
investigation to proceed without
fear or favor to proceed
without, um any sense of some
sort of political or ideological
objective.
But most importantly to just
uncover the facts. Take us where
the facts, um will lead. Um,
give us all the details and then
apply the law of this state to
those facts, and it is in, um,
in our attempt to provide an
honest assessment of the facts
as we know them and the law as
it currently exists.
That we reached a decision not
to pursue criminal prosecution
because, quite frankly, we
didn't think we could satisfy a
burden beyond reasonable that
said, before we get lost
Of that final report. We have
set forth at least two specific
legislative proposals that had
they been in place at the time.
Would have allowed or
prosecutors to move forward with
it under the facts presented in
this case, um first is, um, a
prosecution under a component of
our election code that covers
the
Surprising team and others It
doesn't actually cover the
certificate of not able to
proceed on that basis. Um, more
importantly, um, there is not a
specific forgery statute within
the election code itself, which
is important because it is a
forgery statute in other
jurisdictions that is enabling
attorney generals and others to
move forward.
And the reason it's so important
is we are then left with the
general forgery statute under
our criminal law.
And the general forgery statute
under criminal law requires, um
three specific elements to be
met two of the three of those
elements in this case were met.
We bet we believe based on the
facts that we established
through our investigation, but
the third particular crime has
to do with the specific intent
to injure or defraud.
And the facts and circumstances
of how these electors came
together. What they knew at the
time about how the certificate
based on representations from
the Trump national team simply
foreclosed the opportunity to
pursue a forgery prosecution
under the general statute, But
that said, I don't want this
committee to miss
The important takeaway that we
should recognize the seriousness
of this conduct appropriate
steps to ensure through these
very specific amendments that
prosecutors in the future have
available tools to create
credible deterrent. I will turn
it over to Mr Sullivan to talk
very briefly, parties and the
work that really give a clear
sense of how this, however,
It's important to know something
of an afterthought.
Even from the perspective of the
national last minute.
There were 60 Mexico was thrown
in at the very well.
Thank you, attorney general
Tourists. Uh, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Sean Sullivan. I led the
investigation into the fake
collectors effort here in New
Mexico. As the attorney general
stated, our investigative goals
were really two fold. The first
was to just determine whether or
not there was sufficient
admissible evidence to prove
whether or not the formation
execution.
Lent themselves to any violation
of our existing criminal or
election code here in New Mexico
and, of course, beyond the
highest standard beyond a
reasonable doubt. The second was
to the extent that the
investigation revealed ways in
which the integrity of our
election was undermined by these
fake electors to consider
avenues through which to
strengthen our laws to prevent
that from happening again in the
future.
Um to this, and investigators
engaged in a very comprehensive
analysis of a number of sources
we reviewed well over 3500 pages
of transcripts of depositions
that witnesses gave to the
January 6th committee as well as
the final report. We reviewed
the federal indictment as well
as charging documents in other
states.
We spoke with street
investigators from Michigan.
Nevada, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin,
and we communicated with several
federal entities that had some
hand in this, including the
National Archives, the U. S.
Senate Office of Legal Counsel
and others. And importantly, we
interviewed 10 witnesses that
had firsthand knowledge of this
fake collector effort that
included the five New Mexico
fake electors who signed their
name. It included Harvey Yates,
who was an original
Member that was nominated to
serve as an elector who
ultimately did not.
And it included Republican Party
of New Mexico leadership,
including then incoming
executive director Nikki Kern,
as well as chairman Steve
Pearce.
And we also spoke with the
associate general counsel from
the Trump campaign during 2020.
His name's Joshua Findlay. He
had a hand in researching this
effort, while he readers as
well.
We also review nearly 700 pages
of text messages that were
occurring between these
individuals around the time of
the voting, as well as over 1300
documents between the parties.
Uh, as the Secretary of state
noted December 14th was of the
day in which the electors the
duly elected electors are
supposed to meet in the state
capital and cast electoral votes
That happened in seven states
across the country. But, of
course, Republican electors in
seven states or who would have
been electors had Trump won the
popular vote in those states.
Also convene those mirror image
meetings, the most important
document that signed during
those meetings is what's called
a certificate of votes. That is
a way in which the presidential
electors actually certified who
their votes for president and
vice president are going to be.
On December 14th fake Republican
presidential electors convened
in those seven states that Trump
lost
In five of those states,
Arizona, Georgia, Michigan,
Nevada and Wisconsin.
Collectors signed certificates
of votes that held themselves
out as duly elected and
qualified directors for those
respective states in two other
states, New Mexico and
Pennsylvania.
The fake electors signed a
certificate of votes that were
more conditional in nature.
Those documents conveyed that
the signatories were only
certifying those electoral votes
if they were determined later
that they were the valid
electors of those states.
In New Mexico at roughly noon on
December 14th in the east lobby
of this building, the Republican
electorate nominees convened
President that meeting where
four of the original members uh
Jewel Pod REL Deborah My Estes
Rosie Trip and Guadalupe Garcia.
Harvey Yates was originally
nominated as I mentioned as 1/5,
Republican presidential elector,
but he was actually out of state
at the time.
As a result, the other
individuals present nominated
the outgoing executive director
of the Republican Party in this
afford tenant to serve in his
stead. Also president that
meeting was the incoming
executive director, Nikki Kern,
as well as her husband, John
Kern.
Nikki Kern. Actually, video
recorded the fake Elector's
meeting on her phone and in the
near nearly 11 minute video and
that was turned over to
investigators as well.
That video sort of demonstrates
that these electors were rather
unprepared and unfamiliar with
the process. Jewel Pod REL
served as chairperson of that
meeting, he could be seen
frequently looking off camera
and taking his cues from
somebody else. That person that
he was taking cues from was
actually Nicki Kearns husband
who had nothing to do with this.
He happened to be a lawyer.
Adept at paperwork, and so he
was trying to fashion through
the process. Um, but no one
there at a very clear sense of
what it is that they were
supposed to be doing and why it
is they were supposed to be
doing it.
The video does show Padro
reading the certificate of votes
before it's signed.
And that document starts with
the following sentence.
We the undersigned on the
understanding that it might
later be determined that we are
duly elected. Five collectors
signed that document.
And Nikki Kern and her husband
ultimately send it to the
National Archives.
And the vice president in his
capacity as president of the
Senate, according to federal
law.
The difference between that
certificate of votes signed in
New Mexico and signed another
states can be found on page four
of the packet that we provided.
Uh
That shows a really good
difference between Arizona who
five other states or four other
states, including Arizona,
signed documents that held
themselves out as duly elected
presidential electors, whereas
New Mexico clearly has different
language. So while the fake
electors sort of actions on a
very broad sense, mirrored that
in other states, there were some
significant points of
divergence.
That our investigation
uncovered.
As the attorney general noted,
what was very clear to us is
that New Mexico? What pain
The primary difference is that
we were brought in very late to
the full. These other six states
were sense certificates of votes
and other important
documentation on December 10th
of 2020. Compared to New Mexico.
We actually were not provided
with a draft certificate of
votes until December, 13th at
3:40 P.m.. So less than a day
before the electoral College was
set to me.
Um, that's very different. The
additional evidence which we
uncovered also corroborated that
New Mexico was not a primary
target of the Trump campaign as
late as 456 PM on Saturday,
December 12th gentleman named
Mike Roman. He was the crew was
tasked with organizing these
various electors in in the seven
states. He emailed his staff on
Saturday night and said, Hey, we
need to track this operation.
New Mexico is not included on
that list. The six other states
were
Another campaign attorney who
was working with Rudy Giuliani
sent an email uh 9:30 p.m. on
the night of Saturday, December
12th. It was the first
documented reference to New
Mexico. It stated that the
campaign would reach out to
people in New Mexico to quote
ask if they can throw this
together by Monday.
Even on December 14th after the
electoral voting actually
happened in an email from
Republican National Committee
Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel. She
provided a recap of the elector
effort to President Trump and
his team. New Mexico was still
not included on that list. So
there were important key players
that were involved.
The first involvement that we do
have the communication happened
on Saturday night. December
12th, the Republican outgoing
executive director, and this
unfortunate has a text
communication with the gentleman
named Thomas Lane. Thomas Lane
is the executive, Uh, Election
Day operation director for New
Mexico Right, So every campaign
has an election day operation
Director Thomas Line. There's a
text communication that starts
at 939. PM
On Saturday, December 12th.
They're discussing an impending
lawsuit that the Trump campaign
would file in New Mexico
challenging what they proceed to
be voting irregularities. Lane
suggests the need for the
Republican elector nominees to
meet to cast their electoral
votes for Trump and Pence as a
placeholder. Should the campaign
actually succeed and nice.
Four tenants provides lane. The
contact information for the five
Republican electors or the four
others besides her
And Thomas Lane sends a zoom
meeting invite for the following
day December 13th So this is
happening.
The night of December 12th 2
days in advance of the Electoral
College.
As this is happening.
I'm surprisingly and
importantly, there's
conversations that are going on
in another state. That happened
to be of importance, so recall
that these other states received
their documents from a lawyer in
the Trump campaign named Kenneth
Chess Borough.
He presented that information to
them on December 10th. And so
you have Republican party
leadership in these various
states sort of grappling about
how it is that we're going to
convene these electors on short
notice.
Um
Five of the other states
ultimately sign that version of
the certificate of votes without
any formatting changes
whatsoever.
Pennsylvania does not do that.
The Pennsylvania Republican
electors, as well as their state
Party chairman Feel
uncomfortable. They expressed
reservations that they're
wanting to have them sign
document that holds himself out
as the duly elected electors
went. In fact, Trump lost the
popular vote in Pennsylvania, so
to alleviate those concerns on
December 12th there's a
conference call.
Between Republican elector
nominees in Pennsylvania and can
chess Burrow and Rudy Giuliani,
Where Rudy Giuliani on that
call, Uh falsely assures them
that those certificates would
only be utilized if, in fact the
campaign was successful in their
litigation.
Ah, so after that call, despite
those assurances that are given
to the electors in Pennsylvania.
Can chest Borough takes it upon
himself to send an email to
other attorneys within the Trump
campaign, and there's an email
that we have that takes place.
712 PM on December 12th 2020. He
suggests that to assuage the
concerns of the Pennsylvania
electors that they should use
conditional language in their
documents.
He suggests the following
language.
On the understanding that it
might later be determined that
we are the proper electors, he
goes on to say in his email that
quote it strikes me that if
inserting these few words is a
good idea for P a Pennsylvania
it might be worth suggesting to
electrical in the immediate
aftermath within about four
hours, five hours of that email
Kenneth Chess Borough sends an
email to Mike Roman
A lawyer with the campaign as
well as Joshua Finley, the
individual who we spoke with, in
which he provided those
documents that would ultimately
By the fake electors in New
Mexico. Those documents included
a certificate of votes that had
verbatim the language that
Canada chess borough had
suggested mere hours earlier to
assuage the concerns.
Ultimately, Mike Roman forwarded
those documents onto Thomas
Lane. December 13th.
Mexico. Fake electors had no
knowledge of the Pennsylvania
developments. They were simply
present the following day, as
the secretary of state noted
December 14th, the fake
Republican electors attempted to
convene in the secretary of
state's office. Ultimately they
did so in the lobby of this
building, submitted the
certificate of votes that was
provided them exactly so we know
that New Mexico is different in
terms of the language that's
used in the certificate.
But very importantly to
investigators and we're looking
at fraud. When we're looking at
forgery is to say, what was the
intent of these individuals?
Fixing their signatures.
So the fake electors themselves.
We spoke to all of them many
hours worth of interviews.
They conveyed their rationale
for participating in this as
Submitting placeholder votes
submitting contingent votes to
be counted only in the event
that the election was lawfully
changed. The election results
lawfully changed to trump as a
result of the lawsuit that had
been filed and this. A four
tenants stated that the
electoral votes quote weren't
worth the paper They were
written on as they hadn't been
filed anywhere to her knowledge.
Nikki Kern described the
certificate that they signed as
an insurance policy.
My Estes trip Padre Island.
Garcia believed that the
certificate would only be
operative in the event that the
lawsuit succeeded.
And Steve Pearce told
investigators that the electoral
votes served a preservation
purpose. They needed to vote on
a specific day so that if they
were successful later on, they
had the votes in place.
So those were the statements by
the electors. Those statements
were corroborated by other
documents that we reviewed that
took place close in time or
contemporaneously with when they
were voting writers.
Investigators were not just
taking folks word at face value.
We're looking for corroboration,
and so we had a lot of that
corroboration in terms of
written documentation.
Prior to convening on December
14th collectors in New Mexico
had been forwarded a three page
instruction manual essentially
from Thomas Lane, that
instruction manual have step by
step instructions about what to
do how to cast votes. How many
copies to make things of that
nature, and in that document,
there was an express provision
that stated the Trump Pence
electors would be meeting to
quote cast electoral votes as a
precautionary measure.
In case the November 3rd popular
vote for Biden, Harris, uh
There's several pieces of
communication after the fact
there's meeting minutes that we
saw on December 15th as well as
proposed press releases where
it's clear that these
individuals felt like they had
to meet and and vote on a
certain day so that there would
be some recourse if there were
election anomalies that were
ultimately uncovered as a result
of the lawsuit.
So that's the intent of the
folks in New Mexico and I think,
just step back and really see
what it looks like in another
state. I think Arizona is a
really
If you look at the 11 electors
in the state of Arizona, five
were actually very vocal in
advocating for the vice
electoral votes. One fake
electron Arizona tweeted, it
will be up to the president of
the Senate and Congress to
decide. Subsequently the
president of the Senate has the
awesome power of acknowledging
his specific envelope of
electoral votes when there are
two competing slates or none at
all.
And yet another Arizona fake
elector noted in an interview
that on January 6th vice
president Mike Pence gets a
choice on which electors he's
going to choose.
So that firm grasp of the
electoral counting vote process
and public promotion of the vice
president exercising his
distress discretion in
contravention of federal law is
really indicative intent.
That comprehension of the system
that public advocacy is not
present in New Mexico.
Um, so those basic facts really
served as the foundation way of
sort of giving context to this
The criminal charges in the
other states, as the attorney
general mentioned
Of course, there's factual,
important factual distinctions
between Georgia, Michigan,
Nevada and New Mexico, most
notably the actual language of
the certificate that was signed.
there is also important and
substantive legal differences as
well. They have statutes. We
simply don't have. They have
election law forgery, they have
Impersonating a public officer.
They have other tools at their
disposal to hold folks
accountable that we do not have.
In New Mexico.
The state that most closely
resembles New Mexico in terms of
the factual situation is
Pennsylvania and due to the
presence of similarly
We're going to have some
questions for Mr Sullivan. And
for you, for those of you that
joined us late recognized that
we're in a presidential election
year that the events that were
described for us now occurred in
December of
The last one presidential
election year and so to the
extent that we're missing law in
New Mexico or tools as you
describe Mr Sullivan, those
tools would be ideally necessary
in December of this year or
certainly in advance of, um,
electoral vote in January of
next year, and this would be the
only opportunity of this
Legislature to address this by
just
To assure that those protections
are in place and
For those of you who have joined
us also late. This committee has
worked tirelessly and
commendably to try and protect
our 11 laws to protect the vote
in New Mexico, and I used the
word absurd later earlier today
to put that level of effort into
protecting our elections here,
only to have a small group of
individuals feel that they can
committee so that's the purpose
and convenient Today. I like to
not only identify a problem, but
I like to identify solutions.
My hope and goal of this hearing
is that we come out of this
hearing with this commitment may
feel important working with the
attorney general and your
recommendations, Secretary of
State and great knowledge just
some very specific target and
gold to come out of this
proceeding is cute for allowing
some time for committee
questions. I have Senator do it.
Who's asking Mr Chair and
Thank you all hearing are you
went through all
Like our nominee, our nominee
petitions, they say, I declare.
I am a registered voter and
state district and county that
So if I
Sign, and I'm I'm not on my
part. I have no with that intent
requirement taken out. I haven't
seen
I also see interesting.
A lot of
There's a lot of people who want
to be involved in our political
Felonies. Um
And I don't think that's your
wood.
Protect IX. Ah, from being
reached chair, Senator Do Hig
point is very well taken. I will
note for you and the committee
that the two sketch proposals
that were included in the final
report have been substantially
elaborated upon since the
intervening time we've actually
identified fully developed that
allow Mr Solden to sort of
address that no
Mr Chair, Senator. Do it, Uh,
We did. The contemplation was
not that this be a strict
liability offense to your point.
Uh, the most recent iterate
We did. The contemplation was
not that this be a strict
liability offense to your point.
Uh, the most recent iteration
We did. The contemplation was
not that this be a strict
liability offense to your point.
Uh, the most recent iterate
filed does change the mens rea a
to knowing some other statutes
that
Punish
False information. Um, However,
we wanted to prevent against
just the type of scenario that
you're referencing, which is
somebody that has no criminal
intent. Who makes a mistake on
paperwork being
Caught in the riptide of of what
would be a felony offense and so
to that end one of the changes
that we made in addition to not
eliminating the men's area, but
reducing it to knowing or
reckless is we required that the
information that's falsified the
material, and that materiality
is intentional addition to
prevent a clerical air or some
other honest mistake from
Um
Yielding criminal liability. And
so we think, by introducing that
languages, materiality
In addition to the knowing or
reckless mental state that that
would prevent just that type of
scenario language
But the or upon which is what
are you trying to capture with?
Yeah, it would not.
I think they are Mr Chair,
Senator, I think they are
largely duplicative. However,
what we're really trying to get
after with that second piece is
the certificate of the votes in
a presidential election right?
The vice president is in his
capacity as presiding over the
joint session of Congress on
January, 6th, acting in a
capacity as an election
official.
Is required, or she is required
to open the votes to count them
and ultimately to tally them to
declare a president vice
president elect. And so we
wanted to make sure that that
specific scenario was captured
by stating an election document
that election officials rely
upon so the intent is to be very
comprehensive, in a way that the
current statute is very narrow.
I think the recognition by our
office is that there is no
legitimate reason why
certificates of nomination
election return and registration
records should be the only
documents that are protected
against intentional falsehoods
or knowing or reckless
falsehoods. And so that's really
the intent of that statute to
broaden it should
And maybe I should know this. So
what other states besides Mr
Chair, Senator Georgia has
indicted three fake electors as
well as a number of folks.
President Trump former president
Trump himself. Nevada has six of
them as well. That was as of
December. 6th of this past year
in Michigan, of course, is
charged the 16th operating in
the state of Michigan. Mr
Sullivan so
Do those three states have
similar clearly spelled out and
so forth. But do they have
More beef in there, you know in
their statutes that we seem to
not have that would have
prevented them to, you Know,
charge Mr Chair, Senator, I
think the short answer is yes.
Georgia has Impersonating other
False writings or documents
status. Michigan has election
law, forgery and conspiracy to
commit election law forgery,
which is attorney general,
correctly noted, We do not have
an election law forgery specific
statute in New Mexico and Nevada
has what's called an uttering or
publishing false documents
statute, which is more
comprehensive and broad in
nature, so they do have tools at
their disposal.
Apart from the law.
The facts in those states are
very, very different of the
seven states.
Also electricity science
certificates that said, We are
the electors of this state.
It's false that is false on its
face.
That it
Eliminates the problem that
exists. This is only a
contingency separates us from
the state that in conditional
and then people are relying you
don't you're not able to prove
the intent.
A great deal of the mentally why
we can't move forward. That's
why Mr Chairman, what was the
margin like?
Percentage wise. What, anyway?
Okay, just it's who come after
us. It wasn't close. But anyway,
that's that's not really what
we're talking about. But I get
the hat.
Other way.
What would be the product on the
same day you were in the
building.
Hmm. Mr Chair, Senator Worth?
Um, so all of our post election
process is our time to such that
they shall be completed in
advance of December. 14th.
Uh, in the case of 2020. So, um,
we certify the election at the
statewide level again three
weeks after Election day, and
then we immediately order We
also conduct post election
audits that could potentially
trigger a re a full recount, if
if necessary, If sufficient, Um
you know, pro problems or
irregularities are found as the
result of that audit.
Um, And then those process would
those processes would be
completed ahead of the date that
the electors meet, so the goal
is to have those processes
completed. We also have a
maximum 30 Day period post
election to file an election
contest. And all of these
timelines you know, over the
years have been dessert that
safe harbor date, um at coming
up so that we do have our
process complete and we do have
an accurate
Correct outcome, Mr. Chair and
Senator, Mr Chair and Senator, I
would also add the important
distinction between 2000 What
happened in 2000 and what
happened in 2020 if you go back
and look procedurally,
specifically the litigation in
Florida that
A great deal of that litigation.
In fact, the petition that
entirely around this ideas could
be properly counted.
In in the legitimate process. In
other words, there was a
legitimate contested and it
really had to do with the
timing.
In this instance you know, and
it goes back to the question
that Senator O'Neill asked about
losing an election by 11 points.
Why are we can tell you what Mr
Sullivan didn't have time to get
into is that separate and apart?
There were two attorneys, Mr
Eastman and Mr Chesebro, just
the most wild and unsupported,
um, that I can possibly imagine,
but it was predicated on one of
two things happen.
On January 6th Mike Pence either
could on his own take competing
slates of electors which one he
wanted, Which is why there was
all of that pressure put on Mr
Pence and end or they could just
say there's a there's a contest
from this state. What we're
gonna do is we're just going to
not count any of them and what
we'll do is we'll talk. Let them
vote because that's the
alternate way of electing a
president.
And so what? What?
Whether they knew it or not.
The five fake electors in this
state were enlisted in a
conspiracy.
To enable the vice president to
on his own decide which slate of
electors now I am not saying
that the people who gathered in
the East lobby of this building
had any understanding.
Of what Chester Bro in Eastman
had in their head.
That is why it was necessary to
include states that were close
to it created this idea that the
vice president would act
contrary to federal law.
And just start throwing out
slates of electors. So this this
isn't really about this was
orchestrated at a national level
to accomplish something that was
never going to succeed in court,
which is why none of the
lawsuits that were ever filed in
any of merits anywhere. That
wasn't the point. The point was
to give my throw out the whole
batch.
Kick it to politicians in
Congress to choose the next
president. And so the the side
that illuminates the danger.
So even even though it was a
version of the Keystone cops in
the East lobby of this building
and trying to engage in this
practice, and even though they
relied unknowingly on bad legal
advice, it doesn't mean that the
danger of their participation
process.
And that's that. I guess the
second question I've got is
second.
Question is, if we just change
120 days
Mr Mr Chair, Senator Worth? Um,
we would certainly be able to
charge if there had been the
inclusion the definition of
false election documents. Our,
um, inclusion of an entirely new
crime.
Is predicated on the idea that,
um
Form of conduct that we should
have clear deterrent.
Efforts and effects in place
because part of what we do is
prosecutors is trying to address
a criminal prosecution but part
of what we do in the passage of
new criminal statutes is to send
a clear and unambiguous signal.
When you only amend the false
election code. That's an
indirect signing of the
certificate and sending it off.
But this captures more direct
sort of delineation of this
conduct right because false
election records includes all
sorts of things. This new
Statute on its own.
I think is important because it
separates this this aspect of
our election code as
I can see the argument for
View
bills that have been killed in
violent behavior We found can
move on those issues. Mr. Chair
Secretary of state appreciate
being Department of Justice
Appreciate you being more. Uh,
Mr Chair, Senator. My role is to
do anything that the attorney
general asks me to do, um, and
do it with a smile, Senator
Morris.
Um, uh, I'm an assistant
attorney general, uh, in a
direction change as well. Um,
And so that that was my
secretary. I can be. Uh, yes.
thank you Appreciate my question
is because I was really
concerned about a lot of your
state extremely partisan.
Part of the system.
I was very concerned enforcement
officer.
So that I am not voting for
Donald Trump.
However, your side of the aisle
is
You're gonna be a partisan and I
get very liberal organizations
like journal say.
Baker collectors.
Where did they go to get their
reputation?
And presidential election year.
that sure to include civil and
criminal Attorney General
Secretary Torres announced
Friday after more than a year
long lawyers, um
Uh, Mr Chair Senator Moore's
myself and one other attorney
with it.
I'm gonna continue to go.
Democrats and the media have
tried to
And that's very concerning about
where we're going on Cops.
Correct person. Mexico BOTTOM
line.
We actually put a dollar amount.
On that Mr. Chair, Uh, Senator
Moore's Sullivan is not in a
position to calculate the cost.
Um, these are attorneys.
Who work for a salary on behalf
of the state of New Mexico.
Um, and they were assigned as
part of their regular duties.
Um, we don't do cost accounting.
Especially with respect to
criminal prosecution, so he's
not going to be in resources
invested.
In the investigation.
And the general close very well.
Um
I I'm going to take it as a
rhetorical question, Senator. I
appreciate the spirit. I
appreciate not the hearing of
the time and place for that
center.
Um, I'll answer the question.
No, I wouldn't like to
apologize.
Um to them.
For the conduct that they
engaged in.
Or the nature of the
investigation that was
conducted.
Um, And quite frankly, you know,
Senator, we've known each other
for some time. I do consider you
a friend.
Um, I am. However, um
Troubled by the insinuation that
this was
Driven by some partisan
I can
I assure you
That whatever complaints are
unmatched.
By the committee party.
For the decision that was made
based on the law and business
facts, and so I don't appreciate
the insinuation in that regard.
Um and I think it's a
disservice to this process and
to the implying turn it into
that.
Um, we conducted this
investigation based on
professional and we came to a
conclusion not to move forward.
Based on the
Use or more so I still have
Senator Perlin center, a risotto
had let his big to sync with
your questions. First
did a pretty, you know a simple
reading of the screen. You don't
have to read much further past
the 1st 12 or four other
There was wasted by the office
on this.
And now
On the understanding that it
might later be determined.
It said. In our opinion, the
election was stolen. Trump
clearly states that on from
The words that were stated by Mr
Sullivan. It was clear that they
were under the under suit
prevails.
Uh, lot further than it needed
to much that we have bigger
issues that the
US to do not going to say real
crime because if they did try to
Saying fake
Electoral votes.
It just feels like we're yelling
Fire in a movie theater. It's
fair to us. I don't think it's
fair to them.
Be here years later. Um, even
with I look at the language
that's
That's proposed the new section.
Um
Falsely acting as a presidential
election.
If
Thank you, Senator, Senator Ivey
Soto.
Very much, Karen.
Appreciate it.
And I
Brilliant. The
The the, UM
You don't the report I find
report rather eliminate
Other reports, rather little
Bernie in
And and really, in many ways,
uh, in in the way in which the
people who are the one hand I
find
He agreed to be outrageous.
Find that they were in many ways
victimized.
By by what happened?
At the same time, and for me
reading the report that duality
exists both outraged and
And I find I do think it would
have been helpful just by way of
comparison certificate. Uh
people could
Not just see what what they
signed but see what but
nonetheless it is, you know.
And I do understand was included
in there.
Uh, you know, as I as I
As I looked through the
election, I do. I do see some of
the some of the problems that
you run up against. I agree with
the concern that was raised at
the beginning of a lot of people
who who are participants.
And and do things.
Um, I also recognize that we
probably need to clarify a
little bit better.
The language, Um, conspiracy to
violate the like, Because that's
really what it was. They got
together to do and what the
individual people could have
could have claimed.
But they have lack of knowledge
departed term conspiracy,
wherewithal to say, just doesn't
You know, I It does seem that if
you're going to write a specific
crime it really it's it's as
simple as just already have a
penalty.
Under president, You know any
person astrobiology.
Right?
Wow, It's guilty. Probably too
high. I think really, for you
know, I think I think it's
really as simple as that, and he
tried to participate in the
process. You're going to
You go to the crap you don't
need to fuss with with other
other aspects of it right and
and you can just drop
But it was Mr Chairman. The just
just is that there is there's
nothing in this report that
talks about
It talks about prosecuting
people. It doesn't talk about.
Disabled people in the future.
Really, if you want to help
penalty
The real penalty. That's that's
the disability.
Senator Center back before we go
center, Morris or will you be
back station?
Mr Chair Senator collector is
not a triggerman statute, but
fake is the ordinary meaning of
the word fake is exactly what
these folks were. They're false.
They're invalid. They were not
elected presidential electors
pursue. In that sense, they are
fake.
Nature. You say it's Section
eight.
So
I would ask this if this
Do you?
If under this law
Um Mr Chair, Senator Baca.
We set forth a proposed penalty
that I thought was commensurate
with the danger. Um
In sort of implicit in the
conduct.
And, um, of course I would agree
with you to a large extent on a
number of other criminal
penalties in this state.
But, um
I
I frankly, share Senator about
the future of this republic.
But I take a very different
view of
Where the threat and my judgment
is
Is that we have broken through
some barrier.
Where we have started to engage
in practices.
That regardless of your
political affiliation by a
Democrat or Republican, just
think that our proposal that
this be a second degree with
sending a clear and unambiguous
signal to anyone.
And I mean anyone a member of
your party, a member of my
party.
Who would engage in something
that would enable
Um
Violation of the most basic
thing that we share.
Right?
And so if this committee
Decides that that is too heavy
handed.
I would defer to the job, I
would caution its members to
think about the the the ultimate
harm.
The ultimate harm that can
arise.
From, um
The the execution of these types
of documents across a number of
different states in the hands of
somebody who frankly doesn't
have the kind of fortitude that
My parents had a member of your
party had
Because if he had he done
But he was called upon to do
By the by the fake electors in
the state of Arizona.
It would have been the first
time in this nation's history
that we did not have a true
transfer of power to the winner.
Of the Electoral College.
That's what's at stake here.
now, if if you determine that a
secondary felony is too heavy
that that's your judgment. My
judgment is I think it's
appropriate. Appreciate that and
I'm happy to join with governor
in our law. The the other thing
that I wanted to point going to
that first sentence, I you know,
you read that.
Did it really warrant two years?
This is a budget year, Mr Chair.
Two
Thank you Think I've been
through the committee? I want
first of all for your decorum.
It's very interesting to have a
debate and discussion like we're
having here today where we can
have disagreement.
Perhaps along party lines, and
and then to turn on the news
tonight and watch how this plays
out where I think there's a lack
of that document.
Camaraderie, really trying to
achieve a result, so I want to
thank all of you for the
decorum.
This committee has seen over the
years Bill after Bill to either
chaotically here and I thought
it was very interesting for me
to to present this to my
colleagues into the public
because I think as you pointed
out, Secretary of State, the
Electoral College is a bit of a
mystery to many of us. I didn't
know until the presentation
today about how this works, how
it happens. Who got done
fascinated by it? I hope
emanating and I hope the public
as well because this is again
one of these mysterious parts of
government.
That, um, we we hear about
eliminating electoral culture.
We really don't know what it is
and how it works, and, um, and
it's how we elect the president
of United States. And it's
pretty clear to us also that the
Electoral college does not
reflect the popular vote.
And historically and in most
recent elections, we have
elected president several times
on electoral college alone and
not on the popular vote, so I
think it's important for us to
understand the importance of the
electoral college and how it
works and how, In this case it
was
There was an attempt to
undermine
I also think it's important to
note that the criminal justice
system from my perspective does
not exist to charge people.
It does not exist to convict
people. It exists to reveal the
truth. And sometimes rebuilding.
The truth means finding that
there is not a criminal
Any error in an investigation
that does not lead to charges.
In fact, I think we should
commend ourselves.
For an investigation. That may
be thorough as this clearly was
in great detail, so that we we
do understand what happens
wonderful that
In this case, maybe there are
not charges because that I think
reveals.
The genius of our criminal
justice system.
And and that whatever we call
your department or your agency
attorney general, we can call it
in any number of different
things. But the goal. I'm sure
you you and I would agree as to
find justice urges.
We do have legislation.
As I understand. It's been
induced in the house. This
hearing will not be for not this
is not a show. This is
Waste of our time. We're going
to have legislation. I think
coming
I've asked very quickly and
informally. The vice chair,
Senator Dewey
If she and Senator risotto agree
to work together with anyone
else on this committee to look
at, Um
The really the appropriate but I
have to believe that if there is
a house bill introduced, there's
probably an executive message
out there or one coming.
Which, ideally we could then use
to print product on this
chamber.
And, um, While there's some
Suggesting that there are more
important things to be done in
this session or that we're
beginning. This is the last
opportunity we have before the
next presidential election to me
find ourselves right back.
Where we're at again,
potentially
All over again and
I am fond of talking about my
days playing football, we would
have never thought of the day
after a game without looking at
the film and watching who missed
their block and who who didn't
run the pattern correctly, and I
think that's an essential part
of the way that I function,
which lets go back and look at
what happened.
And let me and let's try. I'm
hoping that anyone else who's
interested in or let's enter
doing and center episode. Oh,
no, but they worked together
very hard over the years on
trust, and I know they've worked
very closely Look and see what
what changes do need to make.
Need to be made. Thank you for
that senator Risotto, and then
we're going to go to
organizational in 10 minutes.
Just like that. I was reported
They were never meant to all
meet together. They each meat in
there personally always refer to
them as electoral. Thank you,
sir. All right. I think this
concludes the presentation
hearing on this subject again.
Thank you for the thorough
presentation.
Pretty fascinating. I don't know
about everyone here, but it's
kind of a gripping, uh
Timelines scenario. Pretty
fascinating story, and I think
history will probably find it
even more fascinating as we go
on to Stewart.
Provisions. We need 270 votes
catered.
Once we have
A step towards getting rid of
also just 15. There he goes
again.
Senator Stewart Minute. I'm just
gonna check on down grass it
Senator Stewart Minute. I'm just
gonna check on down Grasset
Lawyer Jeopardy! 14 What?
115 for
The largest national high. I
think what you don't want to
work with high you were one step
ahead of me many years on that
national popular vote I pass up
the house wise had to move over.
Wanted to give you a plug
subject and I think timely as
well.
All right. Thank you. Once again
for the presentation and as
always,
We don't have any bills in this
committee yet an opportunity
from the public, so thank you
for giving us that opportunity.
We have some business to attend
to. I'll make it very quick.
This is our organizational
meeting.
I wanted my think we all know
each other on the committee, so
I don't see a point. That's how
we introduce ourselves. But let
me first of all recognize going
to you all know, Phillip very
well. Philip helps in setting
our schedule and organizing and
coordinating. And so thank you
for Philip helps been
Six.
Yeah. So
There's a lot. There's a lot to
be said for history. Uh, and on
that same subject we have Emily
returning for her 17th year. You
all know Emily very well
for Philips. How about that?
Applause?
Um, Emily this year deserves
even that much more.
Combination from May because she
has to
Beautiful grandchildren who she
gets to care for a couple of
times a week, and it's not easy
to persuade her to come back and
spend all these hours with us
day and night, day after day
when she has that as an
alternative, But she's agreed to
great deal as well, too. We have
a Christopher, Where's
Christopher? Sitting here? Not
here.
Okay. We have a
We have a We have a secretary
working in the Judiciary office.
Christopher Diego's Who's a
lifelong resident of
Albuquerque, and he's a
paralegal, work and technical
Works as well. So he's going to
help us a great deal. You don't
meet him and you'll see him in
the office as well. You all
remember Brandon Cummings, who
has been with us now, This is a
session.
Um, we have asked him as you all
know related case law, Supreme
Court Circuit Court. They need
to be a an issue before us This
look forward to Brandon helping
us there. Anna is back with us.
Ana Martinez is a native of
Espanola.
And I didn't realize this time
reading this. You're also
Grandma Mom and Grandma
practicing attorney and the
current poet laureate of
Albuquerque.
And she had to misplaced
sessions in the House Judiciary
Committee. Uh, Rebecca proper.
Is it right? Um, this is her
first year in our committee and
two so we have Mr Martinez Herb
has been with the Legislature 18
years, 10 years with this
committee. He told me earlier. I
was very happy that he was back.
And I thought joined me. He's
no. He's actually back to join
Emily. So
anybody told me so Sometimes we
do get a little full of
ourselves around here too. So I
Yeah. So so once once again
additional kudos, too, Emily for
bringing back Mr Martinez, Um
We also and I don't have your
names on my script here, but I'd
like for you to interest Why
don't we just start hearing
Jim Jacobson up.
Thank you very much. And then
here in the back, want you guys
to introduce yourselves? So you?
What are you doing
Thank you very much. We've
thinking, taking care of the
business you all can expect in
the 30 Day session. We're going
to have a lot of work to do. The
bills are not here yet. But as
you all know, they get here and
they all come at one time. Yes.
I'm sorry. You're right.
If you have to work security.
This is the committee to work
on. We're all very well behaved,
You know? Yeah. We usually don't
have to escort anybody out of
this one, too. But, yeah. Can we
have the president's applause
for everyone, But
I will tell you, those of you
that are new to this committee
that in the next 30 days we will
have assembled
That I've ever worked for, and I
worked with some really
exceptional lawyers from sharing
with Philip on down. Our
analysts are cool analysts and
And just as importantly, the
member lawyers and essentially
are more than a few who deserve
that title in the scheme in my
mind with a lot of years, I'm
very excited to practice
alongside and let's continue to
keep
The reputation of this committee
I think deserves
Well, well are all right. Well,
we'll always aspire to do battle
better, Madam president, But I I
do assure you that I think I
have my ear to the ground from
the house and learn next week
Monday. So we so of course,
we're not going to meet Friday
because the Senate will not be
in session Monday will be
subject called the Chair.
We have the services and so
we'll look with the leadership
at what bills are may be ready
for that. We can take care of on
that agenda.
