On behalf of the department of
health and I will turn it over
to my experts in a minute Erin
showers and team and it's a bill
that corrects of language and
the health information I act
that came out in twenty fifteen.
the reason this is important as
one that the language does
definitely you'll you'll hear
kind of contradict itself of the
way the the bills have been
amended and if it's important
because at this time the
department of health has an R.
F. P. out for and all of payer
claims database now what does
that mean that means that the
state will be able to in very
hippa compliant collect
information from all of the
insurers and begin to look at
the diagnostic patterns and the
claims and and the cost and
started to significant drill
down that in conjunction with
the already functioning health
information exchange now called
center knows that just got a
thirty million dollar infusion
from CMS are they collect
clinical digital data being able
to put the two of those together
is going to significantly
advance the ability of this
state to analyze what it's
health priorities are where the
costs are abnormal and where we
can take action to create more
efficiency and also lead to
better health status in our
program so another words when we
should venture money out isn't
spray and pray anymore it's
actually targeted with the
measureable results that can be
evaluated and with that I'm
going to turn this over to area
and showers who is the director
of policy for the department of
health Erin take it away.
Can you hear me I'm so sorry I'm
having a few problems.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you and you can go ahead without
a picture okay thank you
stag Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
hearing this bill the originally
the purpose of his act was to
assist the department of health
the Legislature and other
agencies and organizations in
the state in their efforts to
collect analyze and disseminate
health information to consumers
back in two to two thousand
fifteen SB three twenty three
was introduced in was passed and
the express purpose of that
amendment that went to the hiss
Act was to amend certain
sections of the health
information system act to
provide for safe disclosure of
certain types of protected data
and not included aggregate data
but as Senator Hickey explained
we realize that some of the the
definitions related to aggregate
data and record levels lack of
record level data
had sort of contradictory terms
included in those definitions
and so this is really truly SB
two two two it's really truly
tested clean up bill and we're
just attempting to get those two
definitions consistent and
that's that's all I have for you
thank you again for hearing this
bill and I will turn it back to
the Senator.
thank you of miss showers and
will stand for any public
comment and questions from the
Santo.
Right center you've got number
of other people that are
identified as expert witnesses I
do want to recognize any others
or do you want to just leave the
rest your time to public
comment.
Mr Jeter do you want to have any
comment.
I don't really have much to add
to it Aerion said she said it
pretty thoroughly we're just
wanting to remove the word
provider or hospital from those
two definitions of aggregate
data and record level data so
that there's no ambiguity
and they have sacked between
those definitions and the actual
text of that the has act.
And it's really important right
now because we're the idea H. is
currently in the early stages of
developing are all payer claims
database are APCD and the able
to aggregate data by hospital it
is really a court SSD of APC the
cause that's necessary for
comparing health care costs
between hospitals so amending
those these definitions will
hopefully remove any ambiguity.
And miss cap of.
Grapple with do you have any
comment as well.
I would say that this is
especially important giving the
requirements and needs for
transparency for an all payer
claims database.
Thank you and I see that the
secretary of health is I'm did
she want to way and are is she
good with the team.
thank you chairman I appreciate
the as we speak I agree local
area shared and so I look
forward to hearing the public
comments thank you.
Thank you I think we're ready to
stand for questions comments and
questions Mr chairman hi you do
not have anyone signed up to
oppose your bill or to speak in
opposition we'll go to members
of the committee members the
committee with questions.
Thank you Mr.
Welcome Mr chair Senator Hickey
walking to Senate Judiciary
Committee I got a sort of little
annoyed at this moment as the
sponsor of Senate bill three
twenty three this or some
hearing of this not a single
person on this call has bothered
to call me to talk about this
six years ago we work extremely
hard with the number back to
groups
costs well so she's medical
association did what we're
supposed to do is actually work
with all the interested groups
to come up with this bill
and
With the sponsor this bill will
least got a call one of these
people talk to me about why we
are changing the status of this
time so I'm a little
Confused about this so what what
you're doing here and I gotta
say I will discouraged I want to
give any bills for the past year
without actually called on
state workers and people who had
a best finish something straight
from the website but also
sponsor this bill Senator when
you walk into New Mexico Senate
so I will ask the advocates and
other people.
What's up.
This is another example trying
to a bill about talk
stakeholders are with the one of
the stakeholders with the person
Sanchez Bill artist.
Senator Moores let me ask you
have you have a question you're
gonna need to decide what you
want to have a directed to are
you my daughter out there Mr
chair really appreciate that I
mean I'm wondering and we worked
really hard respective fire
session work on this bill
Senator ruling on it with all
school so she more medical
associates Department of Health
we had numerous meetings
throughout the entire session no
one brought this up to be no
talk to me about the Senator Mr
chair so I guess Austin
secretary what's going on it's
obviously my name was on Senate
bill three twenty three to come
talk to me what's going on Mr
Senator at the yes thank you
senator Morris for pointing that
out I'm also say that back in
the day that that was put
together actually participated
in some of the compromise that
was going on
and I thank you very much for
being the sponsor of the bill it
did take a fair amount of work
there's no question about that
and on behalf of that group I'm
sitting with and are here to
testify today I offer
sincere apologies I will
certainly say I'm a I'm a newbie
and I should have been smarter
than that to know to have
personally contacted you and I
offer you my sincere apologies.
Mr chair Senator Devlin up when
you on that so it's just a
minute from a blind side there's
a lot of those going to the
session where people are talking
to each other the statement
working with each other it makes
legislative process a lot better
if they did also.
Mr chair forecasts secretary
water we doing us after we work
so hard on the six years ago.
So Mister chairman Senator board
I will say that it's my
understanding of the bill is
that if there's a change and
clarifying the definite the
language used so that it's more
consistent was contradictory
involved what Arian just shared
and I don't know piety or doctor
Jeter if you want to add to that
a further clarify.
Sure Mr chair Senator course
thank you so you know what in
the process of going through the
we had to go through a role
promulgation process for the all
payer claims database.
And we were wrapped up in that
and then when we started going
into further into the into the
rules we reference that has act
and then the amendment that you
all spent so much time doing in
twenty fifteen and that's when
we realized that there was an
inconsistency there and so as a
result of that we started going
back and realized this is
internally inconsistent and we
decided that we better bring
this up now versus later because
we don't want to get this we
don't want to have to solve this
later we want to get it done now
and so that's the reason why we
brought this up was just because
we realize the inconsistencies
as a result of going through
this rule and of course when you
go live through lot line by line
through rural and you start
comparing that beat the
definitions unfortunately that's
when you really when it's
applied is that's when you
really start to realize some of
the potential ramifications so
that's really the only reason
why it came up was as a result
of the role promulgation and
that's just going through that
process.
Mr chair I thank you for that so
what walk me through census
forms I'm seeing us walking
through what data you're going
to yes.
That was the problem are what
you're talking about
Codes what do we talk about the
providers no act.
Buy clothes are you talking
about
Some of what you're looking for
so Mr chair Senator course I'm
also going to bring in doctor
Jeter to add in but what I would
say is it actually does not
change the intent that all of
twenty fifteen twenty fifteen
was to be able to provide data
at the hospital level so that we
could say mission valley
hospital had this many
hospitalizations for diabetes
for example and ranch hospital
had this many hospitalizations
for diabetes so we all we're not
changing at all it's it's
staying with the intent but it's
just cleaning up the definitions
so that they are internally
consistent because otherwise
when you look at this kind of a
head scratcher so nothing
changes up from the twenty
fifteen intent it is completely
in line with what you all
decided what was passed in
twenty fifteen that is it.
Mr chair hi the you're not
asking for more bureaucratic
work from the providers did that
is only coming from hospitals
still.
Mr chair Senator Moores that's
correct.
And part of the bill was marked
by frustration with previous
secretaries of help that's part
of bill required the website you
set up to be right transparency
And last I heard after six years
are not been done Mr chair
secretary is our website up and
running those posts provided a
consumer data on this matter and
last I asked previous so
secretary it's still about the
done so the music throughout
your group past lost six years
almost that that actually go on
the website schools to.
Mr chair Senator Moores
I'm gonna see if I doctor Jeter
can respond to that if I may.
Mr chair and senator Morris at
there is in fact a website
called and in health care
compare dot com which uses
medicated the only data source
we have at this point I'm for
claims data is Medicaid data and
I believe that website was stood
up on January first of two
thousand eighteen as was
required and his act but it's
it's very rudimentary and it's
that there is really a very
small subset of data that would
be collected and all payer
claims database.
All.
Mr chair secretary everyone else
that was what something the
reason I wanted to do this those
are we're gonna be transparent
apartment felt almost I was
actually out it's that consumers
would be able to get on the
website and compare data and I
look very disappointed six years
later it's not there you
sentence me to mention so why
did it get done Mr chair
secretary I know you all been
there for a couple months to
really Sanchez we were to pass
this bill to provide consumers
with information so they can
make informed
purchases the government said
that they were going to do it it
seems like it felt our practice
students from the administrative
consider for parties
I find that inexcusable.
Mr chair secretary.
So we are Mr chair.
This is this is a doctor I'm
sorry yes Sir Senator.
Thank you Sir sorry
and that the item number gonna
have today's COVID lesson but
out of state that the the
important some important things
here I'm very familiar with this
having at return to New Mexico
and twenty twelve to start the
health cooperatives and and
myself
feel that health data is a
potential goldmine for really
bringing focus and cost
efficiency so this was a great
bill now getting all that up and
running originally as I recall
it was to have the charged price
for the whatever the hospital
was putting up and it was
primarily on hospitals
how it's working into there's a
great difference between charge
we can be anything I want I can
charge you if you come to me to
get a total yep god bless you I
can charge you fifty thousand
dollars or I can charge you more
prevailing rates but that are
those were billed charges in the
beginning the federal government
a rural by the trump
administration just before they
left office now has those
charges up on requires every
hospital who takes Medicare and
Medicaid to have those billed
charges are available on their
websites so the actual side by
side comparison may be harder to
do and there are is some price
actual pricing of the actual
contracted price is in Medicaid
but the all payer claims
database will allow us and again
without that database that you
can't do it but that will all
the health plans would have to
put their information in and
they will actually be able to
say take that total hip and.
See what the charges at
Presbyterian at love less and
another place so until we get
that the and that that R. F. P.
was just approved and it went
through some memorials as I
recall so that's one of the
reasons there is a delay but I
do want you to know that on the
each hospital now has to have
their charge not their
contracted rates because the
rates are going to differ
between and all the different
health plans that the contracted
rates will come with the
operator claims database and I
hope that to provide some
insight and this is slow going
the trump administration did at
one point contemplate having all
priced contracts out in the open
which again the Federal Trade
Commission a little bit of
heartburn and I don't know that
they completely resolved that
yet but I think that day is
coming that people will now and
again as deductibles get
gargantuan lay high these days
certainly on the exchange and
now we're finding employers are
starting to follow suit with
that
patients will want to know
particularly in an outpatient
procedure what the actual
contracted rate is because they
may have the deductible that is
much higher than that contracted
rate years today
the contracted rate is still in
most instances they're they're
definitely somewhere not cemex
raise and what have you
they'll be the.
That it will be very relevant to
that that this is all taking a
little bit of time and we are
maturing into that I also am an
impatient around the staff and
because I I got I got a lot of
bills to introduce in the next
couple years about.
At yeah you but just wait and
I'm not this is spring training
so thank you very much for
asking the questions today.
Thank you Mr chair those keep
those bills so so minimal
too so if you are using your
kept using the term customary
right.
We define what you mean what do
you look at the doctor.
What rate are you looking at.
you you're used to contract
right I'm sorry you know I I
usual yes what do you get usual
and I want you to find what
you're talking about we're
trying to make up.
Yes so there's three there's
three right levels
there is the actual contracted
rate.
That health plan has with each
provider that in their network
that is a specific number it may
be a percent of Medicare charges
which is quite common
or sometimes it is a percent of
billed charges and bill charges
are the one that I can just pull
out of my whatever and put out
there because I feel like that's
what I want to say
those are those are kind of
difficult to contracts as a
insurer you try to avoid that
but but charge so two one is the
contracted rate three is that
charge right and then if you
remember back to surprise
billing and I was involved in
some of those negotiations we
always are is noble and customer
and member and reasonable and
customary we had it was it was a
back and forth and Medicare and
what have you but we did come to
and actually the federal
government has come to the fair
right that is being established
in their surprise billing bill
and that's what we are
collecting data on in the state
for three years after that bill
passed and then we were going to
re evaluate based on the data we
were getting and get and this
all payer claims database will
make that a hell of a excuse me
make that much easier than it
might be otherwise so there
really three levels.
So Mr chair Senator in center
Lopez and I work very are.
That surprised going budget
solution SO two state thank her
for the water to working with
all sites on that it ended up
being a much better bill will
appreciate.
She works her tail off on that
bill was cited also
so you're still only looking at
our all possible charges not.
Wider charges.
In the contract right so what
what are your expected rates
that will cost she Presbyterian
church or whatever my
understanding if I remember
correctly
Mr chairman and senator Morris
and thank you Senator Lopez for
your bill and actually I played
a role but to my successor more
gaps dean was the real driver
and the physician side so again
thank you with working with them
and also Senator Moores the the
provider I believe we're just
talking about hospital rates and
also that of these I'll stand
corrected by any of the
witnesses and the federal
government is only talking about
facility charges and hospital
charges.
Mr chairman of Senator up in
your plethora of experts anyone
want to work for us Senator
mentioned that he believes that
its own hospitals but can you
confirm that.
Mr chair.
Mr Mr chair and as senator
Morris we're we're planning on
collecting claims data from all
health health care providers
even down to dental health
it's not necessarily just just
hospitals.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
that's a that's a huge
difference and why we got where
gauge metal possible not a lot
of questions
I was gonna ask about bundle
service all let me ask a
question first on the also
bundled service but it sounds
like you plan to go everywhere
on the.
Is that correct.
What you just said Jan was Mr
chair can was that you're
looking at everyone's.
Everyone's fees medical
providers throughout the state.
Miss Mister chairman Senator
Moores I believe Heidi has a a
answer to that.
Mr chair that are more than just
just wanted to clarify that for
this specific bill all that's
being referenced is of hospital
so I think what we're kind of
doing is we're getting into
future which is APCD all payer
claims database and there's
rules that are being obligated
now for that but for this
specific bill are talking about
is hospitals and just making
sure that we can in fact report
data by hospital any data by
hospital for hospitalizations
as intended by the twenty
fifteen amendment so that's all
we're talking about for this
bill they'll be other bills with
respect to our they'll be in a
PCB coming out we have a vendor
we have an RFP process we're
going through that identifies
the vendor and the data is going
to be coming through that way
and there's rules of them
promulgated but this specific
bill only refers to hospitals
just be very clear.
Mr chair Heidi thank you for
that what about the the question
about fungal Services.
Mexico law schools.
So I think that that is actually
going to be that is going to be
actually something that goes to
the APCD when it stood out and
then drive here once responded
that he can but that is not
specifically part of this bill.
I I'm but Moores Mr chairman I
would like to respond to that I
have been heavily involved both
nationally as well as locally in
front of charges
bundle charges in the beginning
were going to be the panacea
health care costs but the
complexity of a bundle charge
particularly when you think of a
a a surgical operation of the
facility or hospital.
Apple who how much is a surgeon
get how much is the
anesthesiology get how much this
pathology get because there's
likely to be tissue how much
does radiology get how much does
the hospital get and at as I've
been able to follow it they've
all there there been basically
you have places like the
Cleveland Clinic or the mail or
the hospitals system out in
Pennsylvania Geisinger who had
thirty thousand dollar cabbage
period end of story well that's
great because they are a
completely integrated system.
But the ability to
The ability to to break that out
in the world that we're in is
very very difficult and so it's
it's don't hold your breath for
those other than some very
simple ones yeah members were
you just talk about Mr chairman
our doctors you know you send
out a slide to Cleveland or mail
or something like that you're
talking about a whole different
ballgame how will disapprove
chairman Senator your expert
witness can not this not be seen
as a constraint on right.
Are you just looking to.
I I'm sorry I constraints
constraints on trade it seems
like you know the that we're
driving not really getting so
constraints right.
Our.
I
I can't tell you exactly how the
federal government got around
that in charges and how they
were going to get around it in
actual contracted rates
they have they felt confident I
know people in HHS but I cannot
tell you there is I believe that
that issue will be an important
one going forward and I look
forward to the dialogue and and
hearings on the Senate and that
when it eventually gets to that
point.
Mr chair you know these these
contracted amounts are protected
information currently up because
the contract so what we're
saying by doing this is saying
those contracts support which
should Representative the
interest of all the attorneys on
the committee that we're saying
that these despite what the
contract say we're gonna find
this data to this agency we're
basically getting recording
contracts attorneys pretension.
Right the bill as you as you
participated in twenty fifteen
was to get these to get some
sort of comparative right out in
the public
the actual as a contracted rates
The I I think we'll probably be
back.
And I just I just got a text
message to the confirmed are a
question I have Mister chairs of
the feds are not doing this the
way that it's been described by
the testimony
I don't know if anyone wants to
address in the differences
between what you're trying to do
that you're trying to do Mr
chair expert witnesses
but I'm I'm getting text
messages saying that it's not
what is actually happening what
the Senate's anyone want to just
jump in on that.
I'd be happy.
Los outside of this committee
with the people who are sending
you the tax and see if we can't
figure out if it's a definition
or whatever that we're using but
the feds have definitely
required that charges billed
charges
and I there may have been a
three hundred diagnostic
categories that they that had to
be both so but that is that's
happening and I would be more
than happy to have those people
if they can get a hold of me and
my email Martin at Senator
Martin Hickey dot com or on my
constituent phone or text five
oh five nine zero zero one eight
four one and this is not a paid
political announcement.
Mr chair Senator that's the your
order great Senator putting that
information for you but what I I
just I have a lot of concerns
about the constraints right I
have a a lot of concern concerns
about this information being
used to set market rates offered
by the insurance companies as
you move forward we're in
Medicare doesn't pay work across
Medicaid as we're work across
and now you're basically set the
prices so concerns.
Also chairman general involved
in this and we're city markets
these what issues as we move
forward so I have a lot of great
concerns about this contract
will all of our products earlier
Quite frankly so smart it will
be but nobody don't bother to
call
just talking about this before
it could save a lot of effort
when we work together Senator
Lopez and approved number years
ago actually get things done and
move things forward
I person that really helps
so I have a lot of concerns
moving forward on this and to
look for work with you Senator
if you drive if you and your
legislation.
No Republicans and Democrats
will sometimes with little spats
aside and actually work together
for the betterment of healthcare
there are is no party it's just
a what's best for the patient
and questions.
Thank you Sir Senator so want to
start taking so much time but I
will serve on this one so thank
you thank you Senator Hickey
thank you excellencies thank you
Sir secretary so supported so
you.
Thank please just respond really
quickly.
No
that's not what works Senator
Wirth.
Right I move to do pass the
Senate bill two twenty two.
I see no other discussion
committee members Emily Senator
Lopez gems of the also the bill.
No Sir no Mr Chairman just a
second that very very good we're
ready for roll call vote Emily
will you take a roll call vote
on the committee please start
off by.
Welcome.
Yes.
Yes.
Both.
Yes.
This yes.
No.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart yes.
And thank you Mr Moore and I
will communicate to to you.
Dr.
Senator.
Thank you.
Sure school meeting.
Mexico seven Senate bill one
fifty two Sierra.
Martin okay.
Good afternoon everyone.
Still gonna happen yeah I do
this thanks for calling out just
how much Senator Hickey in a
call center.
Okay good afternoon everyone
Senate bill one fifty two.
This is
the data go to the Senate bill
fifty one that was vetted by
this committee at.
Last year Senator Brandt is my
co sponsor.
It was brought forward last year
during the thirty day session
we're past Senate floor thanks
to one house committee before
running out of time
this is a amending the
continuing care act which
governs the financial affairs
long term care facilities for
elderly residents.
These types of facilities have
the following characteristics
to pay up front.
Cost anywhere from a quarter to
a half million dollars depending
on the size of the unit number
two in addition to the initial
fee there is a significant
monthly fee of three to five
thousand dollars and number
three it provides a lifetime of
multiple services including
independent living communities
assisted living amenities
transportation medical care.
And skilled nursing care these
types of facilities have become
increasingly popular with folks
who have the necessary financial
resources.
And
However there's been some major
issues of a risen with these
types of organizations specially
here and New Mexico since June
of two thousand eighteen
Representative Liz Thompson I've
been working with a group of
residents who had some concerns.
What are those concerns number
one.
They are.
Our concern that their initial
upfront fees are being used to
buy other properties this
organization that the umbrella
organization held in Carter's
purchased properties in
Oklahoma.
Colorado it's and Santa Fe and a
Avenue facility in Rio Rancho.
Number two the quality is cares
been slipping complaints about
the quality of food.
And the.
The failure to build a
Health care unit although.
That was promised five years ago
and that may now be under
construction and number three
they're very concerned about
that that creasing for forty
five million to two hundred and
twenty million over the past
eight years.
Residents contacted the
administration with complaints
nothing happened annual
financial reports are sent to
aging a long term services
however they didn't have any
staff qualified to review the
documents.
What aid you want your answers
ninety quit.
Was that a quick to Eric to her
staff to do the C. document
simply sat on a shelf.
Until the summer of two thousand
nineteen when the cabinet
secretary could train up how
rural Lopez was appointed she
assigned her general counsel to
reveal them we will hear from
for general counsel Sarah Jacobs
shortly.
This bill is a recognition of
bills.
Your turn services commitment to
provide a stronger regulation
and oversight.
Mr chair this.
Bill has three major provisions
briefly they are number one it.
Requires a providers to include
and their community care
contract a provision that
describes the communities plan
for resume location in the event
that there is necessary and need
to re locate number two it
requires the office of late.
Office aging long term services
to.
Review the disclosure statements
filed.
And the pursuit of statements
filed pursuant to dissent and
number three.
That is amended to allow any
person to report violations of
the act to the attorney
general's office.
Speaking is turning general's
office the.
My co sponsor Liz where my two
co sponsors it lists a.
Representative Liz Thompson I
contacted Attorney General's
office business September ninth
two thousand eighteen.
To investigate to finance
reports having Carter lifestyle
group.
And they.
Your preliminary findings I in
the fall in December of two
thousand eighteen.
They told us that there were
violations however they were not
permitted to share any details
beyond that eventually we help
though to learn but these
violations are.
This makes it even more
imperative to Senate bill one
fifty to be enacted this year.
It is important this bill be
enacted to bring about the
accountability and transparency
with respect to the facilities
governed by the.
I think continuing Care Act this
concludes my remarks I believe I
co sponsor representative
Thompson baby on board and may
wish to make a few comments
thank you Mr chair.
You Senator you have us seven to
six six to seven minutes for any
other speakers or experts you
wish to recognize their common
your floor.
Thank you thank you Mr chair of
the this is Liz Thompson
available Representative Liz
Thomson.
Senator Senator Representative
so what we're doing things
judiciary's we're giving you
fifteen minutes unfettered to
put on your.
Yes advocacy for the bill so I
know you have a number of
opponents that may wish we
recognized I'm leaving that
entirely up to you Sierra and
you have recognize
representative Thompson you'll
you'll have the floor until four
fourteen okay thank you for that
that.
Have a front information
Now I have the on board the
general counsel.
Sarah Jacobs is she available
and if so does she want to.
Madam now or answer questions.
Mr Jacobs Mr chair Senator
Tallman Jacob you trying and as
we speak.
Mr chair Senator Tallman us
their joint after you.
I'm sorry your muscles did she
did she said what.
Domon Mr chair Sir Sarah Jacobs
is now present in the meeting by
Curtis V. you are letter in
please he is yep Center home and
I'm in.
Sorry about that I'll be super
quick Mr chair members of the
committee first of all thank you
to senator Tom in.
To Senator Tom and senator brand
into representative Thompson we
were before this committee last
year this committee did make
some technical changes to the
bill which is exactly the same
as you passed out of committee
so we thank you for those
changes and as the senator said
our secretary secretary hold
from Lopez is very adamant about
these changes to the continuing
Care Act and we're looking for
trouble getting whirls around
specifically the closure
language that we discussed last
year also so that thank you
again.
Okay Mister chair and how we can
turn to of.
Folks in opposition support.
Well we don't have anybody in
opposition you still have about
that five minutes left if you
wish to recognize anybody I have
a list of proponents of.
Coordinated Becky demont all the
more short suing don Norton
Lizabeth wire at Whitman Sarah
Jacobs enjoy right have all
signed up to speak at the end
and then to be like recognize.
These.
So
we want to recognize enrollment
center because of its their
mortgage Mr just wanted I just
got some news that you might use
of in that for Representative
Santa and extendable whose form
almost passed away and I know
you guys are really close
residents are smarter S. R. yes.
I'm sorry for saying it like
this.
We work closely together for a
long time.
Yes Representative their clock
fermented.
I apologize Mister chair I
thought some guys like to those
precious dollars.
But we work very closely with
our membership our you
I think many of you all new ad
was a pretty active on Facebook
the last couple months and has
been battling.
Over and complications and
hospitalized for much that I
know Senator Lopez I saw you
communicating with them from
time to time and I did the same
of course Senator Stewart and I
serve with him Senator o'neill
served with him in the house.
Our our districts overlap a
little that we work together
number thanks.
And I see the Representative
Maestas as well too so Center
Ivey Soto we all knew it well he
was.
Just a wonderful man and I'm I'm
sorry that he's but the last I
think probably two or three
months to give us kind of a day
by day of the the the time that
he battled this disease and a
lot of.
I might slides from.
Sure that will speak more to
this on the floor and recognize
them with the appropriate the
solemnity of all of us and our
colleagues but it would just
let's just give it a minute.
Please rules will resume in a
moment or two.
Our.
Thank you for that.
We set a for us had few days a
point.
Senator Tallman recognizing that
we had an interruption there you
have a you have five minutes Sir
to recognize any additional
supporters are proponents you
can recognize of you asked me to
do it I'm gonna divide your
remaining five minutes among
everybody was on their which
means everybody will get about
forty five seconds to a minute
are we wish that Sir yes you Mr
cherry compensated calling on
the folks who want to speak in
support.
And I handle it all right and
our zoom operator has a Senator
story looking to recognize yet
Mr chairman we interrupted the
young woman who was talking to
us so if we could at least
finish with her comments of
course that's right thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chair Senator
Stewart and I think I was about
done that as I said I think unit
this bill was in front of this
committee last year this
committee did make some
technical changes to the bill of
the bill before you one fifty
two has adopted all of those
changes and as I mentioned
secretary cultural at that is
adamant about this this bill in
particular and also promulgate
rules related to closure
language
in those are continuing care
contracts and again just thank
you to the Senator the
Representative and also Senator
Brandt and this committee for
hearing us today thank you.
Thank you Sierra gonna recognize
each the following individuals
four of them about thirty for
thirty seconds back active on
Matt Paul a short distance to
and Dawn or in that order will
have three others after that Mr
mon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee my name is Rebecca do
mine I'm resident of the VD Yang
I retirement community.
This is the third year that I've
written letters emails and then
present in the committee
meetings asking for you your
support get this bill passed
it's important to point out that
we're not a bunch of rich people
living here in the lap of luxury
in our case my husband and I
paid over three hundred fifty
thousand dollars and pay over
six thousand dollars a month
rent they have all been car
lifestyle group as insurance for
our future we gave them our nest
eggs sold our home and then gave
them our nest egg because we
have no children to rely on in
the media is our plan you have
physical and how support
throughout our lives we dip into
our savings every month because
our pensions and our social
security you not fully cover our
costs we are very typical family
here except were much younger
we're seventy two the average
age of the four hundred twenty
five people living here is
eighty five years we're a bunch
of old people insufficient
reserves create systemic risk
leaving approximately four
hundred twenty five seniors at
my facility alone financially
and medically vulnerable
thank you to go on a long way
thank you thank you have to
recognize other speakers miss
miss shorts followed by their
store don Norton Mr George are
you is not here all right sewer
don Norton are you admitted.
Elizabeth Dwyer are you
admitted.
Again here there is there's a
repeating very difficult to
hear.
To start my comments Mr getting
hold on.
Folks everybody
everybody Mr weir please stop
reading of five.
Mr weir you've been muted.
All right less than perfect
technology all right let's see
we've got.
Whether the jumped in.
These please do not.
Please note please nobody speak
here there is.
You very well I think here.
And here is.
There's a repeating.
We stop.
You start are you needed.
Everybody's J. all right
let's see we've act.
With the gentleman.
These please.
Please note we know what we are.
All right.
Folks the way we perceive it is
you'll be recognized by the
chair what I recognize you
you're allowed to begin speaking
please do not begin speaking to
even recognize and Mr chairman
if I may they need to turn off
the sound from the webcast.
If they are not the sound from
the webcast they will not get
the delayed.
Yes so so we're getting there
for those of you folks who think
you're going to be speaking if
you have the webcast on and
you've been admitted to the zoom
you're creating the problem for
us you can't be doing both so I
had gone through the list and
I'll start back again do we have
either sewer don Norton here.
Right I don't see them.
Receipt is you'll be recognized
by the chair what I recognize
you you're allowed to.
Ms wire do you have us on in two
places.
I may thank you for all the
sound from the webcast.
The song from the webcast they
will not get that the late.
Okay I'm gonna have to assume
operator just mute everybody
we're gonna going to Pat Whitman
is that women in the room.
Mr Jacobs in the room.
I guess Mr chair but I already
spoke thank you you're good
start thank you.
It is only right it in the room
that's it all right is right.
Your that you do not have the
zoom going on at the same time
that you have the webcast one on
all right okay all right you'll
be recognized for up to one
minute.
Okay my name is ray I'm a
resident of Louisiana and have
been for the last five years
I've spent a good part of those
five year study the finances of
a financial background I'm very
concerned about the fact that
the debt has quadrupled in the
five years I've been here from
about fifty million over two
hundred million.
Please that the aging long term
services department is going to
be actually looking at and
studying the.
Information that is supplied by
having Carter to them in that
based on the rules of the
continuing Care Act the what has
happened over the last five
years that I've seen is that the
surplus that you generate in
Louisiana with the entrance fees
and the monthly service fees the
surplus that is generated for
the money that has brought about
living in a residence is being
used for corporate expansion we
are the only facility of the
five facilities in having Carter
right now that's making money
that has a surplus.
And that money is being used
outside of the Indiana.
And not being used for residents
thank you miss right.
I thank you miss right all right
we'll go back to Mr weir missed
wire please understand if you're
both on the zoom and on the
internet conference we're going
to get a feedback an echo and.
Thank you this committee my name
is Elizabeth Dwyer I'm a
resident of the neighborhood in
Rio Rancho I am seventy six
years old I've lived here since
March twenty eighteen bye bye
Inphi was two hundred and sixty
three thousand four hundred
sixty seven dollars a little bit
more than I sold at home for my
current monthly fees thirty
eight hundred dollars it's going
to go up to forty four thousand
eighty five per month in April
one I am a retired City of
Albuquerque employee who
discovered the meeting and I
when I had to visit every
nursing home in Albuquerque in
order to write a grant
application of the department of
justice that's when I discovered
L. the L. was not just a nursing
home I love the concept of
continuing care on the same
campus and understood the buying
and to be a form of paying
forward for my future care
however what I've come to
understand is that my investment
is not secured like a long term
care policy and that puts me and
my neighbors at risk as a
retired public sector
professional I think continuing
care retirement communities with
the paying forward Brian plan
are excellent public policy
however if the aging a long term
services department does not
have the proper authority to
oversee the corporations that
own are CCRCs we could all end
up on Medicaid SB one fifty two
provides the aging a long term
services department with that
authority thank you for that
moment and grant for sponsoring
the bill please vote yes thank
you our.
I saw that don Norton your name
will admit you Mr Norton please
make sure we're not into spots
you'll have up to one minute
when you're admitted.
We can provide a resume operator
with many of.
Mr chair don ordinated Medici
just not speaking Mr Norton your
microphone is muted Sir.
If you your microphone all
recognize your very good there
are yes this is so Norton I'm
going to speak first what I'd
like the committee to understand
is where former residents at
Louisiana we moved out.
Of our own free will.
There are the average age it
would be eighty eight it is over
is eighty six years old many of
the residents there are aren't
able.
Physically mentally and some
either financially from
understanding and taking part in
a more
knowledgeable way of what's
going on they are being abused.
because they don't understand
and have no ability to
understand what the corporation
has done.
Thank you Mr Norton.
All right that exhaust the
speakers I have on my list just
to be recognized.
What will go next to members of
the committee.
Senate senators so we need to be
recognized your show me your
hands all get you on my list
show of hands anyone.
Committee members Senator
Stewart.
Right Mr Chairman having heard
this bill last year multiple
times having sent through all
the amendments that we put in
last year or maybe the year
before having heard that all
those amendments are in this
bill I move they do pass.
Senator Stewart Senator Lopez.
I'll seconded Mr chairman right
seeing no other committee
discussion Emily are you ready
for roll call vote please.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes Senator Lopez says yes to.
Moores is a yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Sierra you have a do pass on
Senate one fifty two Sir.
Thank you all for all the joined
us in the presentation
representative Thompson good to
have you with us thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee very good okay all
right we're gonna take a minute
to see if we can find Senator
Campos.
I know that senator do it's been
working with Senator Campos
wrote his bill.
Inspection of private prisons
the last will have a lower
percentage Campos.
Struggle
he's trying to log in now we
also have a Senator Ivey Soto on
Senate bill twelve.
And then we'll get to.
The heavy work of the day on
liquor licenses Senator Campos.
Your Senator.
Binance to switch.
Member center Campos is
switching over from his finance
zoom committee to the Senate
Judiciary zoom meeting.
I wish that folks who are not in
the legislature back home could
know that not only do we get
hundreds of emails every day on
every one of these bills but we
get a dozen or so try to keep
straight ourselves which zoom
conference we're supposed to be
in at any given time the special
our bills are being heard in
other committees so we're
logging in logging out
throughout the day and it's a
it's.
Challenging how's that.
And Mr chairman F..
Senator getting people there
here are.
I was just going to tell you
that I'm gonna have to log off
to and go to finance but not for
awhile.
Well I don't see Senator Campos
Senator Ivey Soto.
Would you like to our we're
trying to House Bill five.
Well.
Well actually we need to roll
that over into Friday please all
right.
Well that but Senator Campos and
other minute but evidently not
enough.
Me just a minute folks let's see
if he's gonna join us I keep
being told is.
Thank you for your patience
folks I'm being told Center
combos trying.
Senator Campos is joining now.
All right good.
Campos one your bill.
Okay thank you two ninety one.
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee and my apologies I was
in finance and just as you are
trying to do or we're back and
forth from a one committee to
another Mr chair and of course
members of the Judiciary
Committee in that sense Senator
to ninety one relates to the
correctional and institutions
requiring inspections of a
privately operated correctional
facilities and along with that
in essence this is been an
ongoing issue for many years of
by many have people in the
public and their concerns in
terms of are the of private
prisons continuing to be
inspected and within that what
this bill does is it asks that
the Attorney General of conduct
audits if you will or visits are
to ensure that there is the full
compliance within our private
prisons in essence that's what
this measure does Mr chair
members of the committee.
There Campos my understanding is
that there may be an amendment
sponsored by want to committee
members that right thank you
very much Mr chair yes there is
and I also have a Mr Thom Cole
buyers who has been working with
me on of this particular issue
and at your convenience like if
I could to us to make a brief
statement as well on behalf of
Senate bill two ninety one all
right I have as your expert
Mister car wash and I have one a
proponent who's asked to speak
when we go in here Mister car
wash and the proponent of forget
the amendment thank you very
much Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
My name is Tom Mexico AJ and I I
work with a our prison rape
elimination act independent
auditing firm we work nationwide
in adult and juvenile facilities
to audit for standards of the
prison rape elimination act and
we.
Fifty.
Audits nationwide so.
We have a unique perspective on
on the problem that we have in
our prison systems
What we have seen recent reports
from the department of justice
on widespread of physical and
sexual abuse in in prisons
including in Alabama and
Washington state are we the
lower and normally at excuse me
we are.
Just an audit not too long ago
have a juvenile facility.
Where they fail their pre audit
and also
a few weeks later had a had a
death because the death of one
of the juveniles.
So the staff because these
situations are not you need to
the tune Mexico but we certainly
have those problems here
The way I think nobody would
disagree that rape is not part
of the sentence.
And we certainly want to make
sure that we do everything we
can to have humane
incarceration of our New Mexican
citizens so.
One thing that we were told in
in in rebuttal was that that
they're already inspections well
that the inspections that exist
at have inherent flaws.
And for instance the ACA was was
mentioned NACA is is a tractor
group and their auditors are
paid for by their clients and
that so and just to give an
example there was a recent audit
of a juvenile facility by the
ACA yeah and in the same year
that they gave them a hundred
percent rating at a federal
judge said at the same facility
that it was a cesspool of
unconstitutional conditions so
it's a lot of times the problem
is that the inspectors of the of
the the existing inspectors
have a bias or don't do their
jobs including pre auditors and
that's why the department of
justice is starting to crack
down on on that problem as well
as but it was that private
prisons in particular there's a
lack of transparency abate they
claim they're not a governmental
organization so documents that
are requested through freedom of
information act are are not
produced and.
Other examples are for instance
in ice control facilities they
had.
A multi million dollar contract
for people to inspect to make
sure that everything is up to
snuff and they called there at
Nakamoto group contractors
worthless at because they they
were not getting any real value
add of these inspections so what
what the problem
Let me just say I had a friend
who passed recently and it was
twenty five years sober and he
he used to have the saying if
nothing changes nothing changes
and in the US we have
independent inspectors somebody
in the the attorney general's
office that looks into these
facilities and make sure that.
That the existing inspections
have been done properly and that
people are given a chance to
speak at when we go do an audit
we speak to inmates and as well
as just staff and the inmates
open up to as because they know
we are independent that we're
not of the agency and that is
extremely important in getting
information as to what's
actually going on there
So I I do want to point out that
The the cost estimate
You know and unless public
prisons are included
I can't imagine that that that
the so would be a full time job
because
An auditor can do to audits in
in one not a single auditors so
if you look at the number of
facilities as an and as we
expand the scope of the
legislation have that that
estimate may be a bit high from
the attorney general's office
and and as well as the fact that
they would be partially offset
by fees I would like you to
consider that
There is also besides the human
cost at there is the cost of
lawsuits there are.
Going
evolutions in and have a court
are are looking at
The eighth amendment violations
that are supported by prison
rape elimination present might
delimitation Act violations
there are recent court cases
that have gone through at the
appellate level setting
precedent as to the culpability
of the parent agency and these
are multi million dollar
lawsuits and and can have effect
the operation of the agency and
the taxpayers.
I do.
The attorney general's
recommended amendments may agree
that there should be defined
as a affect if so if these.
Private prisons or a ever gets
inspected sales their corrective
action period if if there's not
to even the bill then there's
really and there's you know
there's no enforcement so in
Oklahoma for instance we had the
health department would inspect
jails for health reasons and if
there were violations of the of
the health orders they can be
fined up to ten thousand dollars
per day that they were in
violation those orders well
guess what they never had to do
that because people paid
attention and they didn't want
that kind of fine so something
like that should should probably
be added into this bill and I do
appreciate your time and your
consideration thank you thank
you very much Mr chairman of
course members of the committee
I have had a conference with the
Attorney General and Accorsi
continues to go ahead and
push before accountability along
with that of the issue the news
service are these inspections
and we paid for and it does
indicate that the private
prisons would be responsible for
the.
Compensation for those
particular products thank you
very much Mr chair.
And perhaps if the chair is busy
maybe I could describe the
amendment.
I'm not I'm not busy I
Was it of the host to do we have
Cirkut.
admitted into the webcast.
Mr chair she is not here I think
she was the only proponent we
had no opponents on the
legislation were to the
committee Senator doing with the
proposed amendment.
Right thank you Mr chair and the
committee members had this
ammendment email to them if you
look at the most recent email
and miss Garcia or I don't know
if you can bring it up thank you
so I'll just give it a
description of what this
amendment does overall first of
all this would make it apply to
both of public and private
correctional facilities
And our.
This would make it so and one of
the really critical things I
think of this bill is that these
inspections can be done without
notice having done some
inspections of correctional
facilities myself when they know
you're coming.
You can absolutely tell so the
without notice part is preserved
in this ammendment it makes it
so that those inspections can be
done every at least every two
years rather than three.
It makes a so that rather than
the Attorney General a point in
the inspector it would be
Legislative Council on that's
another effort to make sure that
this is a truly independent
inspector and one that is as is
chosen by part in a bipartisan
manner by let's Council I'm just
to further remove any any
politics from this process it
also changes the qualifications
for the inspector also rather
than being someone who has a
bachelor's degree in criminology
would be someone who is red hat
is of recognize judgment
independence objectivity and
integrity and usually qualified
by training or experience in
corrections on policy it's also
someone who has not been an
employee or independent
contractor for correctional
facility or in the case of a
private facility that the parent
company within the last two
years and also isn't within two
degrees of content single
anybody with someone who's been
an employer or independent
contractor with the last two
years.
This ammendment also
In fact if you could scroll down
a little bit.
Thank you it makes clear that
during inspection the inspector
would be able to essentially go
anywhere that inmates go and
anywhere that programs are held
for inmates and that their also
able to take photos and videos
And.
For the cost not in the original
bill because the the AG was the
one of pointing the inspector it
had the AG the facility that was
being inspected paying the AG
for that inspection because
we've changed it to let's
council during the appointment
the facility building inspector
would now reimbursed the
inspector for reasonable costs
of the inspection rather than
those costs going through the
AG's office.
And if you could scroll down a
little bit more.
The reports that are produced by
the inspector before they were
just going to the AG and the
secretary of corrections now
they would also go to the
appropriate interim legislative
committee.
And.
In the list of items that the
inspectors looking specifically
having to do with medical care
and mental health services one
of the things that is assessed
is also going to be the quality
of those services.
Accessibility I another thing
that's going to be would be
specifically assessed with this
amendment would be the use of
physical restraints on our.
I know you want to you know
forty what.
And then finally and and a lot
of these changes are just taking
out this privately operated to
make sure this clearly a plus
all correctional facilities
finally if if an inspector comes
up with a corrective plan and
that plan is not followed this
would it then the inspector
would essentially forward that
information on to the AG and the
secretary of corrections for
them to proceed with enforcement
of the corrective plan and that
that unfortunate could include
the assessment of fines.
I don't know if there's any Mr
chair there's any questions from
the committee on the amendment
there there may be a have to
have the most give me a full
screen or identify anybody who
showing their hands we're not
seeing a show hands on the
proposed amendment right now
questions on the amendment
anyone.
Senator Pirtle the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I had an amendment to simply
include
Public correctional facilities
in here I do have a concern with
with where this goes without
having much time to.
look at it but I am curious
just.
What the reasoning is for some
of the additional language other
than just bringing in public
correctional facilities.
Sure Mr chair Senator Pirtle we
want to make sure that if we are
doing these inspections that
these are are good inspections
done by someone who is is really
qualified to look at all these
complicated issues
and that there's T. as as Mr
Gorbachev mentions that there it
is T. that that is it this isn't
just are.
Something that you're checking
out checking a box on a piece of
paper and and the results are
meaningless there should be
consequences if corrective
actions are followed and there
should be we want to make sure
that the people that are doing
this work are are really
qualified to do so and don't
have a conflict of interest.
And thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for doing this I know
back home this year has made it
a point to
do some surprise inspections on
the local correctional facility
and he has mentioned it's it's
quite talk to to do a surprise
inspection and usually that
means only he and and his chief
deputy even know that it's
happening and so I do appreciate
the amendment and hopefully
people find a way to ensure that
it is a surprise inspection
That people don't have a heads
up so I'm hopeful for it I don't
know that that that this quite
guess there but it is definitely
an improvement so I guess my
amendment will not be necessary
if this is adopted thank you Mr
thank you Sir Pirtle anyone else
on the proposed amendment.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of the amendment.
Senator Baca objection the
minutes are anyone else.
Show all others present from the
committee in support of the
amendment back to the bill as
amended.
Committee members.
As amended anyone Senator Lopez.
Mr chairman I would you pass.
For the past their store it's
got a second what Senator doing
at the same time Senator do it.
Senator was or something else
yes.
Mr chairman I I really hate to
say this but you know the
amendments for as long as the
bill.
you know if we're I mean I I
like this bill I like we're
trying to do I really appreciate
Senator do hits amendments.
But are we really going to send
it out like this.
We appreciate the Senator I
think it's good suggestions.
with Senator Campos approvals
Senator Campos what I'd like to
propose we sent out a committees
of.
With uh Senator do aids
amendments incorporated into
your bill as appropriate so that
what gets on the floor as easily
read by our Senate colleagues
number one even more important
when I guess to the house of
they they may not quite have our
skill set in the house and so we
want to make things as easy for
them as we can.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the Senate
Judiciary Committee I first of
all just fully depreciated
Senator Duhigg working very
closely with the to ensure that
we do have a strong working
amendment and I have no problem
is becoming a committee
substitute.
I think it's a good suggestions
Senator Stewart committee
members is there any objection
to that the being part of the
motion is that we would be a on
a do pass motion for the US
Senate bill two ninety one as
amended but get coming out as a
committee substitute with those
amendments incorporated.
lab.
All right any other discussion
on the on the bill then within
moments.
Thank you.
very quickly Mr chair I just
want to make the point that this
is this is a good bill and this
is as a good step forward but it
doesn't create the kind of cope
comprehend pensive oversight
that that we really need to
address a lot of the issues that
Mr Kobach was talking about and
there is a bill in the house
that will hopefully be coming
over house bill one ninety one
that creates a corrections
ombudsman that I hope gets to
this committee because that
would create the kind of
comprehensive oversight that
that what is needed and and
would not conflict with this
bill anyway.
Thank you couple things all
Senator Baca.
Sorry Mr chair never mind
disregard
right Senator do ich we have an
interim committee called the
courts corrections and justice
committee.
It is a committee that I chaired
years passed and then most
recently have not been on that
committee because I was not sure
Judiciary I have a feeling I may
get put back on that committee
by the leadership our our habit
historically was to visit some
correctional facilities in the
state and a couple of things one
thing that one of two things I
found interesting no big
surprise we go there and the
place was a spit shine in the
and the in a button down
everybody was on their best
behavior.
One of the things that I got in
the habit of doing Rick
routinely as the chair is
asking for inmates to come sit
down with us outside of the
agenda set by the warden or
others and and pulling people
out of the the population and
pass the word to have them come
sit down with us and visit with
us and we would usually get a
very different story from from
that of the institution I found
that so incredibly useful number
one number two the other thing
that the what is a little bit
different as I cannot recall now
which corrections secretary it
was a it was a male and to his
credit he during that
administration I think was on
the Representative
administration essentially and
riding put in a letter that any
legislator was welcome to any
state institution at any time
caring the letter with his
signature on it and we were to
be admitted into any institution
at any time without notice.
And and the that was a
correction secretary who had
confidence in in his job and the
organization he was running but
he yes I think it was all
lettered said you're welcome to
come to any my facilities at any
time show my letter with my
signature and of all called to
confirm it and you'll be
admitted to the institution and
given access so I I do
appreciate what you're trying to
do here Senator Campos and with
the help of the committee
including center doing what we
do need to avoid but what we
should avoid it's it's good to
go see our institutions with
preparation but it's also
important that we
give the.
Given the reality check once in
a while in the right way so we
appreciate this bill center
Campos were anyone else in the
committee were on a do pass for
the committee substance okay do
not pass on Senate bill two
ninety one is your motion
Senator Campos and or I guess
it's a generally the motion
center start there start Senator
Lopez do not pass to anyone two
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute two ninety
one is well the roll call Emily
electoral calls with zoom family
place.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Yes.
This yes.
Do passed thank you very much
sure.
Hello good afternoon thank you.
Committee members announcement
and then a suggestion.
We have one bill left for the
day.
The bill that we were working on
Friday evening I got a little
late on us Senate or house of.
Three steps of rascal to fifty
five.
That'll be the last matter on
our agenda today my intention is
to have the committee meeting no
later than six thirty we want
late on Friday will be will be
added by six thirty today unless
the committee feels that we're
making progress.
That requires more time.
I also like to let all of you
know my intentions are to meet
Friday.
in Friday I usually of busy day
on the floor I don't I don't
hope to keep us late Friday
night but I would ask the
committee to plan to be meeting
for us Saturday afternoon.
And and likely Sunday afternoon.
If anyone has a conflict with of
those settings I'd like to hear
it and understand that so we can
anticipate that but right now
those are plans will be
publishing an agenda for Friday
Saturday and Sunday.
Not going to wait on any of
those days I'm hoping but to
make some progress and as you
noted today we're we're finding
bills have been passed
previously
and and there are far along or
ideally don't involve a great
deal of need for amendment.
So that's that's our goal for
those three days.
It's also one of my intention
right now with some caution but
I'd like to stand in recess for
fifteen minutes to five minutes
after the hour for a reason one
is I'd like to be able to take
the break because it will be in
our home stretch the other thing
too is before we do that my
understanding is there are a
substantial number of amendments
on on the coming bill for us to
consider that's going to involve
most of our work for the
afternoon we will not go back to
the public.
on on the amendments but I
wanted to make sure that first
of all everyone has access to
the amendment knows where to
find them and that we use this
break a small break for
ourselves to make sure that
everyone has those and has the
opportunity to organizing become
familiar with those so let me
turn to Senator Ivy Soto center
Ivey Soto how of the amendments
or center Moores have these
moments been distributed to the
committee
first of your.
What is going on right so that's
a good place.
So what we're.
Committee members should have
hopefully gotten a a binder with
the amendments in that as well
as the bills if a committee
member has not during this break
are there in the building they
should contact the R. go to the
Senate Judiciary Committee
office or let us know and we'll
get one down to you.
Our out so that everybody has
them I will also alert everybody
that conversations with our.
With several members of the
committee today including that
included the ranking member
along with the chairman not all
of the calls all of the
amendments that have been
submitted will be considered
today.
And then finally we do have
we've got a request and to
Legislative Council to combine
nine of the amendments together
that we've agreed upon those
have not come back down yet from
groping and so it is my hope
that as we work through a few of
the signal ten amendments that
we need to do
that the that the our agreed
upon I'm the best amendment will
will arrive if not I'll I'll
I'll I'll try to expedite it is
yes.
Senator Ivey Soto before we
proceed a little bit the I do
have a a notebook I'm I'm
concerned this is the first time
in my twenty years that we have
actually a notebook with
amendments that's not a good
sign but but being that is it is
it is I appreciate you
organizing that you center more
than others were put that
together let me before we take
that break let me just check the
any committee members who wish
to weigh in now who do not have
the amendments in a binder so
that we're following along
together is there anyone
okay center store does not have
the amendments Senator Lopez
does not have the enrollment
center Baca.
Floor.
The Santo I certainly that to
you so Senator Stewart Senator
Lopez center Baca all the the
amendments and then and the Mr
chairman one last thing also it
is my understanding that when we
begin when we come back from the
recess and began we are
beginning with the bill as it
left the house and was
introduced in the Senate.
and I was.
And I was gonna be my point this
chair of the we had adopted
amendment I had the floor we're
working on another let me know
if you need me to retract the
amendment we were working on if
I need to make a motion to
retract first amendment we
adopted well I could do that to
which servers parliamentary he's
just waiting for but otherwise I
think we have a great that we're
starting Brandon.
Correct I appreciate that thank
you is gonna be Emily are
secretary to make sure she
understands what is to this
procedure will just well this
mean what us move what will
months it will move to I donated
by their work okay Senator
Stewart you're my Mr chair.
Your story reminds.
For more.
I removed the amendment we were
discussing on Friday that we
were talking about with the
world of the historic areas and
then we had adopted a amendment
dealing with the Mexico spirits
those and that member number one
I don't know if you take a vote
on that but I would like to
receive in that amendment and
then we can start from scratch
just take that as a motion by
unanimous consent was facing
objection there being no
objection we have I'll resend
that the first amendment on on
this committee to Senate or to
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five and with the
next order of business will be
of the amendments that are
proposed either by Senator Ivy
Soto or others I when we will I
would like to keep the floor so
I get my equipment and first
please.
Hello you Senator Ivy Soto
discussed that during arbitrate.
Where we are they were right
about.
In the I'll be restored as
question yes Sir Sir I just
needed to tell you that I found
the amendments they've been sent
to me electronically and so I
have them on my other computer
so I don't need a binder my.
Looking out for the earth always
Senator Stewart aren't you right
right right good so Senator
Lopez and Senator Baca have
them.
Lopez out of the we'll get to
that Mr Chairman I'm a little
bit more old fashioned I still
like to see them in print.
Thank you you and me both
centers all right so everybody
knows where we're at we're gonna
be tackling a lot of amendments
a lot of work on this bill this
bill because you all know as a
very strong implications in a
lot of interest we wanna make
sure we do a fine job this
afternoon and everybody's fresh
I've got about three minutes
before the hour we'll start back
at fifteen after five fifteen
please I'm using the break for
good purposes to get organized
with the amendments and to give
us all a little bit of break so
we go for the home stretch
please don't use that as an
opportunity go get lost and do
something else I want to start
back probably at five fifteen
also get out of the habit of
taking these recesses so let's
let's be five fifteen okay thank
you.
I'm here to displace you might.
Thank you.
You're not on mute Daniel.
on all over.
Okay I'll move on to.
All the respect respect.
It.
I was told when I talk with my
mute button off people can hear
me.
That's the point.
Ivy Soto is a you're senator
Morris going to get us started.
I will are a year before to
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Steinborn
thank very much Mr chairman so
we begin consideration out of
house bill two fifty five we had
a a presentation at our last
meeting on the bill overall
there are a number of amendments
that have been submitted.
And we are so of those who have
the the PDF or the books we are
going to take these amendments
out of order that they are in
the book that's just because as
we discussed them it makes sense
to do so and we are also not
going to be considering all the
amendments that were submitted
some of them were duplicative or
court conflicted and so
therefore we're not going to
call all of them so Mister
chairman R. as we proceed right
now and I will do my best and we
get to each of these.
I will do my best to
You are I have the I do a share
screen with the amendments that
were looking at that particular
moment as a way of trying to
help people who are
Watching a long.
And our and so with that Mr
Chairman we're going to begin
with one of the colonel
amendments and is titled.
Our license fees and the number
of the two oh two number on that
amendment is
is two two zero three three
eight point one one last thing
Mr chairman some of these will
have a different name for the
person who was putting it on and
and that was just because as
things were getting drafted
there was an attempt to expedite
the drafting and really very
much want to appreciate chase
bank border and and the proving
folks at Legislative Council
Service for the incredible job
that they have done in terms of
getting all of these prepared
for us so Mr Chairman this is
this ammendment.
The right now all two two zero
three three eight point one.
Presented by Senator Pirtle and
I will yield to Senator Pirtle.
Plan the amendment interview so
do you have speakers on.
Yeah I was trying to jump in so
help us a little bit we we have
the men on the screen but we're
looking for the notebook
unfortunately these are tapped
organize I'm trying to figure
out how do I find in this not
what well there in the order of
the table contents that you
have.
So if you're looking and then
notebook it'll be
It's it's the last one under
center for listening.
And I'm sorry I don't have that
table of contents maybe that's
why I'm confused so if I may
Mister chairman it's it's up to
the the third up.
Vaider.
Or so.
My notebook but
Okay all right on the screen.
Can.
I feel to Senator part of the
standard spend the amendment
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator so in the bill currently
depending on how much you're
just look what liquor that is
sold of the fee for the licence
scales up for me I think that's
a little bit complicated and
leave room for people to
change on paper how much spirit
this liquor they sell and so if
you want to and it's ten
thousand dollars to have a class
you license it makes it simple
clean
and any shares that we don't
have to count on bureaucrats to
to police this that it's it's a
lot more simple and
straightforward but that all you
for questions.
Senator about us right yes I
would yield first to the house
Sanchez worker position on this
and then I will give money is
the Senate sponsor.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator pirtle said this up
though so it's on page forty two
we think we found a good middle
ground Mr chairman my bill
originally had the restaurant be
licenses at twenty thousand
dollars the governor's the
Senate bill rather had it at
three thousand dollars we were
we learned about the seriousness
of selling liquor and and the
pricing of the rest of the
licenses so we compromised at
ten thousand dollars however if
you have a smaller restaurant
on.
Which we want to create in New
Mexico these small kind of going
to restaurants it's a fight it's
a step down seventy five hundred
five thousand or if you have a
tiny restaurant of less than
twenty five people it's twenty
five hundred dollars so we like
the stair step with its fair we
we appreciate where the Senators
coming from but we are this is
on friendly amendment.
Mr chairman I would have to
agree as well I do think if you
look on page forty two of the
bill of lines three through
twelve.
That's what this would replace
those lines three through twelve
with that blacktree Senator
Pirtle it's suggesting but I
think it I think it allows for
greater scaling of of of and and
and different rules enter the
restaurant the license also I
would agree that that is an
apartment number.
All right committee members I'm
I'm looking for the amendment
but I I see it on the screen is
this just a one page memo is
that right that's it yes Sir
okay and I read so I
misunderstood Center I was
suppose you're gonna be
presenting amendments that there
are are.
You're gonna be presenting that
but which you do not support
that is correct are are part of
the part of the agreement that I
have with the with the minority
is is that there are some
amendments that they wanted to
make sure got heard and so we
are going to have those be
presented.
Ever there are others that we're
not gonna present all.
In the explains what this man is
not in my notebook.
I'm just wondering okay
committee members on the
proposed amendment three thirty
eight point one.
Questions.
With the committee.
I have a.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I just want to tell
you that I have found what
you're looking for in the snow
all
so as representative of my just
to set if you go back.
To after the first green sheet
that's the bill itself.
You're the next green she.
It's the house amendments after
the third green sheet there is
the table of contents with the
names of next to all of the
amendments with all the numbers
and then I'm assuming it those
after that so if you find that
table of contents which is
buried in the notebook but is
behind the third green sheet
then that you will figure out
where everything is in the note
just wanted to tell you that.
Okay thank you Senator I I I
found that in the appreciate the
help all right committee members
I'm looking for Chopin's I'll
talk with the zoom posed when I
have a document on my screen for
whatever reasons there you go
all right Senator Duhigg anyone
else on this proposed amendment.
All right Senator Duhigg the
amendment I'm told the amendment
is on friendly by the sponsor
through Senator Ivey Soto and
etcetera etcetera Ivey Soto
Representative Maestas I'm gonna
assume unless advised otherwise
that when Senator Ivy Soto
indicates that amendment is from
around from and that
Representative Maestas agrees
with that Mr chairman of.
Not necessarily but
Representative Hochman Vigil I
myself will be.
We'll be telling you from the
house what's from you from okay
well get a little complicated a
little bit but all right so in
this case Center Ivey Soto says
this is not friendly what do you
say Representative Maestas
unfriendly what do you say
Representative they open.
And friendly Mr chairman all
right committee members that can
Center doing on the amendment.
Mr chair and I I I don't support
this amendment so this taking at
this language would remove the
body right now about language in
there you can pro rate the cost
of a license for the very small
restaurants are paying the same
as as very large restaurant
and so removing this language
would seem to put our our
smaller businesses at a real
disadvantage at a time when I
don't think we would want to do
that.
You.
Committee.
All right.
Senator Stewart so Mister
chairman how are we going to
prep proceed.
Senator Stewart west the
committee has a better
suggestion I'm so we're gonna
take roll call votes on these
amendments as we normally would
with amended every one of them.
Mr chairman and senator about a
third of the amendments are not
going to be brought up.
Okay.
Senator Stewart others there's
probably a better way to do this
but why I'm leaving it to the
Sanchez and I know they've been
working on this to the very last
minute so.
We invest we cannot okay right
the so there can it committees
understanding to go ahead of
things as you all know if we
were to do a committee
substitute the bill would have
to go back to the house process
it's late in the session for
that.
all well leave it to the
sponsors to expand on this but
our discussion has been that
ultimately we would assess all
of the amendments that passed by
the committee on a vote and that
we would ultimately then put
them into what is effectively a
committee substitute but we
won't call it that we'll call it
a amendment of the entire bill
so the bill coming out of the
Senate Judiciary Committee would
be striking everything the house
did and adopting the house
version with our amendments as a
as an amendment that makes
sense.
Yes.
So bill Senator Lopez after
center do it on the up what are
doing were you done on the
amendment.
All right here muted Senator
Lopez on the amendment Mr
chairman and just a just a
reminder that there is the
amendment in context so that
when this does come out again
that it will have the amendments
that will be placed within what
I would call a floor mock up
when this bill comes out.
All right emphasize we're
fortunate to have chase of an
order with us to help us make
sure that gets done right.
All right we're on the amendment
this is three thirty eight point
one.
Ten thousand dollars
this is Emily this is gonna have
a roll call on this and I'll
take a little bit longer but.
Let's see how that goes for a
while on the amendment please.
Yes to adopt the amendment now
otherwise.
Senator Baca.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez no.
You should.
That.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart no.
No.
That has failed Senator Ivey
Soto next up yes Sir so the next
one is a little bit we're going
we're going to go towards the
front of the book a little bit
and it is another one for from
Senator Pirtle what if that says
two to zero three one seven.
Point one.
And which I am putting on the
screen right now.
And it also a one page
amendments and will yield to
Senator Pirtle to present.
Senator Pirtle.
Well Mr chairman I don't see
center portal at the moment the
various but.
I'm here Mister chair.
So essentially what this
ammendment does Mr chair and
members of the committee we were
working on this on Friday.
that would
Ensure that our historical
districts were restricted to how
many people that have seated up
are within the M. R. A.'s and
and and the historical districts
currently in rural they are
limited to under five and so
this would just ensure that that
the areas that we're really
trying to build up
would be able to operate at a
higher capacity under the B.
license.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr
Chairman just to just to the
specific one that is before us
right now this is the one that
has no more than one license per
two thousand five for persons in
the district Mr chair Senator I
was looking at the wrong one so
what this amendment does if I
might.
this amendment would bring the
restaurant be licenses to the
standards that are original
licenses were held to before
they were allowed to move all
over the state and so this would
just make sure that we don't
over saturate this really gets
to the heart of the intent of
the legislation we have
municipalities like dexter and
Willard and out more and places
that really can't support eight
three hundred thousand dollar in
our local license but yet
there's a need for a restaurant
with
the ability to serve spiritus
liquors but yet in your large
municipalities there is a fear
of over saturation so this would
really do what the intent of the
bill was and that was economic
development our rural
communities but ensure that we
don't have oversaturation in our
tourist towns in our large
municipalities thank you Mr
chair.
But I would be able to Senator
arch Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Pirtle center Ivey Soto this is
up unfriendly amendment we want
to our restaurants to flourish
and allow.
You don't know where is to
develop a restaurant industry.
And up Mr chairman of from the
Senate Sanchez perspective this
is also an unfriendly amendment
we are trying actually to move
away from the quota system that
we have historically had and and
what this does is that it would
impose the quota system on this
new restaurant the license and
so for that reason it is on
currently.
Thank you house and Senate
versions committee members
questions on this gonna be
amendment three seventeen point
one.
Questions.
Many
pleasure of the committee.
Also I think there's a motion
presenter portal on this one.
Mr chair can I go without saying
that the speed things up.
So what server a motion for a
pass on the amendment yeah I'm
almost to table it.
Second.
The motion and a second for the
table roll call on a table in
motion please.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Moores yes.
No.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
This yes.
That is table that's three
seventeen point one not today.
And our service chairman of the
let me just also give you all
some good news and that is
proving did
a miraculous job.
Of getting the the I'm nervous
amendment of agree to amendments
there's a couple of that will do
piecemeal but we'll be able to
address a number of those
together and those are all being
sent out to everybody's provided
email address R. and if if
somebody needs it to a different
address on the committee if you
would just text then I'm gonna
do.
meantime the next one that we're
doing I'm sure my screen again
is
two zero three fourths sex.
And
There are three.
Everybody copied the L..
Zero three four six is this
Representative also by Senator
up pirtle and the this is the
one that is titled Act
provisions in our local move.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
This as language to the title
allow dispensers license to be
transferred out of local option
districts intact and allowing
certain Spencer's licenses to
reinstate retail privative
privileges it also removes the
two hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction and the one hundred
thousand dollar tax deduction
retailer license holders it
removes the two percent liquor
excise tax it's also commonly
referred to as a retailer stacks
and then it restores dispensers
license to its original form
allows a sell package liquor
makers and the transfer the
liquor license to any location
the state except McKinley County
this provision was lost under
previous law and and so I think
what it really is set to do is
is we've seen communities that
that since the last time this
was
visited back in the eighties our
communities in Dona ana and some
of our our tourist areas state
really does or angel fire those
when the license is removed and
they lost the package so there
really is a need for for package
in these areas and so this would
bring it in and would require a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
to attach that back to the inner
local to become a force sensor.
Thank you.
For the sponsor of first Senator
Ivy Soto women's center my ****
from around from the.
Popping Mr chairman R. so this
would be an unfriendly one and
one of the reasons primarily why
I've been I'm probably one is
we're trying to move away from
package up to on premise as much
as possible in terms of policy
and so therefore we don't want
to reinstate these at this time
but I would also you know to
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
risotto Center Pirtle unfriendly
unfriendly appreciate the
attempt to try to.
To try to thank you know make
these folks whole but package
sizes are not going to diminish
their their market value and
this just.
Doles out liquor stores
throughout the state so we're as
it is on friendly.
Thank you committee members of
questions.
One moment.
Questions anyone.
Pleasure of the committee on the
moment I'm missing Senator
denarius are doing anyone else.
Two passed.
We've got to do passed motion
and a little bit of an echo what
your microphones please.
Committee members on a do pass
motion.
All right we'll take a roll call
on the new passed motion this is
usually where the majority
somebody jumps in and says
motion to table but the.
Well table.
Second.
The proper garbage would be
substitute motion able
substitute motion to table.
Now we can now is is very funny
yes.
stood with the second by Senator
do a run of tabling motion.
Were amendment three four six
point two.
On the table a motion Emily roll
call please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
I don't know.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Three forty six point two
amendment tabled next item up
Sir this little thanks very much
Mr chairman Mr chairman we now
move to Senator Moores and the
very first I'm proposed
amendment in your book up to
seventy five point one and let
me yield to senator Ortiz.
Thank you trump on a certain Mr
arm chair Sir Senator all this
is a real simple one in the
builder is a upgrade in New York
around noon stacks up to percent
Sales excise tax referred to as
retailers taxes the new tax
being implemented I think it's
going to projected to raise
twenty two million dollars of
new revenue for the state this
is a simple set earlier small
businesses or hurting or this
bill is supposed to be designed
to help small businesses
restaurants up to the shut downs
the last number here or last
year in creating new taxes just
not so appropriate at this time
just another burden on small
businesses that we're trying to
help so this moves to taxes
twenty two million dollars that
we are trying to add special
time with our revenue situation
we're looking at which is not
the time to add a tax on top the
small business the structure.
I'm sure it's a very friendly
moment from some right so.
Representative Maestas now Mr
chairman I would I would yield
first two of Representative
mass.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Moores and risotto it is a one
friendly amendment you know I'll
call as a commodity as a social
cost this is very reasonable.
My bill started off with a
nickel taxed we compromised in
the house at two percent and we
have to pay up we have to pay
for the tax deductions
We think two percent is
reasonable it does not affect
commerce it will not affect
whether somebody purchases a
martini or not
and it's passed directly on to
the consumer so if you don't
drink you don't pay the tax.
Unfriendly.
I am not Mr chairman this would
be a and I'm friendly amendment
from the Senate sponsor as well
primarily because I think we've
been trying to hold the line
with paying for deductions
that we do and our various bills
instead of doing all the
deductions and K. mail and then
doing and paying for elsewhere I
will note that if this one fails
there are because they are the
tax deductions for four years.
The the next amendment that I
will be presenting will be one
to sunset the tax after four
years.
All but none the less this one
is before us now from this would
remove the tax all together.
I'm probably.
No Way members on the proposed
amendment.
For show hands.
Senator Stewart has a hand up.
Restored I'm sorry what figure
out why I don't see a full
screen gang now I do Senator
move to table.
Motion to table.
Second from Senator Lopez.
Well let's take a roll call
please on to seventy four point
one is a table in.
No.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
This.
Yes.
No.
No.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
This yes Senator the the
proposed amendment to seventy
five point one it's been
rejected on a table in motion
the next matter up Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr chairman I will present at
this time of.
It is
About the six one down in your
book it is number three one two
point one even though in the in
your pocket is not listed under
my name but I am.
presenting its.
And the
You want to try and find it
we're.
The manager not any kind of
order that I can discern I I hit
I I yeah and I hit the wrong PDF
for the screen share and I
apologize let me get the right
one up.
Are.
Okay so committee members I find
this the hiring.
I just behind the first green
divider after the table of
contents which is behind the.
It's like the second or third re
divider right.
That number three one two HSD
it's just simply a delayed
repeal section five or July July
one twenty twenty five so it
would sunset the tax at the same
time that we sunset the credits.
I would be able to
Representative Maestas.
Thank you
Mr chairman Senator Ivey Soto I
think this is reasonable
you know folks who are clamoring
that they want to they that they
want.
Their licenses purchased as we
all know the government can just
purchased our licenses the
government permission but but to
pay for the tax deductions and
to be reasonable around we think
that I think the four years
since that is a good idea it's
friendly.
Mr Chairman representative I
will to create we finalised
well.
So the prime of its adoption.
Motion and a second.
On the.
We actually just a moment
Senator Stewart.
You Mr chairman so can Center
Ivey Soto tell us what the house
floor amendment number two is
that we're striking.
Certainly Madam pro time that is
actually Mr Munger prophetic all
of the amendments that was an
emergency clause but the final
vote in the house was not by two
thirds and so just as a matter
of course he put that on all of
the various amendments.
Right thank you step by that
much.
Other questions.
I just have a couple of directed
to Senator Ivy Soto etcetera
Ivey Soto you said something I
missed it the this the sunset of
the tax corresponds with the
sunset of the deduction of the
of the tax deduction that is
correct.
Very good.
These questions of the
committee.
And we will take a roll call
vote we have a due pass motion
on three one two point one.
This is.
Yes this yes this is the.
This Baca.
No.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
This yes.
Senator Baca that we get your
road runner was that no.
Yeah put me down for no right
thank you.
There is a do pass on three
twelve point one the sunset
amendment is adopted.
Yep right next one Mr chairman
is the very next one in your
book.
R. and what this one does is
right now we allow.
we allow people to purchase from
wholesalers of licensees to
purchase from from wholesalers
on thirty days credit the thirty
days credit historically has
resulted then in a sense that on
I'm sorry and I'm gonna lean on
people's licenses however
because we're going away from
the commodity licenses and going
to all regulatory license that's
that's not a feasible aspect
anymore R. in addition because
with the win when you do the
purchased with thirty days our
experiences when when people
purchase for retail sales with
our thirty days credit what
happens is they buy a bunch in
order to get a cheaper price and
then they have a lot of
inventory they end up and
running drink specials the end
of doing other things to kind of
push it out the door so they can
pay off the credit it's a better
situation actually port for us
simply to have people pay for it
as they buy it or certainly not
to have that be stationed as it
has been in the in statute and
so the way we do this is we do a
step down of the of the thirty
day credit so that goes from
thirty days to fourteen days to
seven days to zero days so that
so that we don't we're not
overly disruptive within the
practices the people have had
but we move in the direction
that we need to go on to again I
have a better relationship with
alcohol overall structurally and
plans for a loss so with that Mr
chairman I would be able to
House sponsor Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman of Senator
Ivey Soto no it's it's a
interesting policy initiative
but at this time it's
unfriendly.
Four point one I'm probably it
was probably from the house
sponsor it is very friendly from
the Senate sponsor since we're
in the Senate I would ask that
the members followed the sense.
If I may let my voice Mr chair
that as the second house sponsor
I'm also considering this non
friendly amendment.
For what it's worth
the committee members of
questions.
Committee members of questions
sure sure.
Thank you Mr chairman I did not
hear Representative a day
Hochman was it friendly or
unfriendly in this I'm probably
for both of us.
So so can I have some
explanation of why it's
unfriendly.
Mr Chairman Senator Stewart if I
may well we can the amendment is
well intentioned but the problem
it creates for us is that we are
trying to help out restaurants
and this the changing of this
policy will probably just help
those package dealers and and
other larger stores who would
benefit from the change whereas
you know restaurants sometimes
have pretty fun park profit
margins and they're going to
need to have that extra time
sometimes to you know Q. for
cumulate an invoice a bill and
and pay it so I we would be
putting them at an unfair
disadvantage at a time where
they are already hurting and
that's that's the explanation
that would be a.
Sure for well Mister chairman I
I just don't like this friendly
and friendly staff access to all
be on friendly or all and
friend late so I don't know if
there's more discussion because
I'm kind of in a not knowing
what to do here now.
Other committee members
questioned Center Moores.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Senator thank you
Representative.
What questions kind of as a
interesting idea is there any
other place in more industries
where we say of the business
have to do a cash on demand
forces credit.
Is this the only industry that
actually would have that's.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
I'm actually not aware of any
other place that we have in
statute.
Where we where we have allowed
people to
We're built where we put in
statute that they should have
credit extension provided for
them.
And the and and so I mean that's
that's this is this is part of
what has happened.
R. as a result of the commodity
licenses and
And so that's you know Brickley
this section of law probably
shouldn't exist at all.
R. because the market should be
allowed to drive it to but
unfortunately we're trying to
extricate ourselves from the
situations that we've been an
over these years and again
trying to get healthy
relationship in terms of of of
how we manage alcohol on from
from production to sale.
I appreciate that thanks for
vaccination I I can't think of
any role that I get now basis
says castle Amanda usually
within thirty days so I
appreciate that aspen Senator
are so I guess my the one more
triple question is so I
understand the uniqueness of
alcohol but do we do this for
our marijuana they are all the
same since you're you're talking
about similar industry will be
once we regulate for by wise.
That's our point and something
we should probably consider as
we address the marijuana issue.
Mr chair Senator it's not
currently in our medical
statutes that they they would
have to pay cash for the
settlement for to their distro
suppliers.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
right now of the the producer
and the retailer are the same
under the marijuana
laws that we have and so as
results in fact the retailer
does not over purchase although
they may over grow.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Sir for explanation and thank
you our representatives for
explain your side of it too
thank you.
The committee members questions.
I'd like wise have some concerns
about the proposed amendment
within supported I'm
increasingly concerned with New
Mexico's not devolving ourselves
into in any state I don't think
that that we have to tell
businesses how long they should
operate on credit how long
invoices should go so forth so I
I don't see the gonna policy
reason to do so so I I can't
support the amendment either but
the thank you for the discussion
members of the committee with
your pleasures.
Mr chairman I will also just
note that Texas the but I would
accept that matters when we left
the lawn Texas actually
prohibits credit sales of
alcohol from Alzheimer's.
Mr chair was a lot of laws of
Texas we can adopt and so there
you go.
Yeah that's that's an argument
that's fraught with any number
of different perils
I spent a lot of time in Texas
my partner's index I think the
world of taxes but the this is
not been there months and
yesterday other governor did not
impress me very much at all so
all right we're on the proposed
amendment pleasure the
committee.
Motions.
I
move to table at two fourteen.
Three fourteen point one might
tabling motion.
Not only will take on a roll
call Linda the I'm sorry looks a
lot but it's just something more
no all right I want to table a
motion Emily please call the
roll.
Yes.
Now.
So no ma'am.
Locus yes.
Yes.
Senator pro.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Thank
you yes.
Yes.
That amendment three fourteen
point one is tabled Senator Ivey
Soto Mr Chairman all right would
at this time if I may offer an
amendment and if I may do some
verbally.
R. which is because I do agree
that the regulation of this
issue as a problem.
R. and and so what I'd like to
do is.
I have section twenty six I'm
sorry section sixty dash seven
eight dash nine.
Yield.
Our in our twenty twenty five.
And that work for at twenty
twenty five.
we would not take a position on
credit extension on our for
whole by wholesalers.
So Senator you're proposing a
new amendment that is not in our
materials my correct that is
correct.
All right of.
How Sanchez.
Rendering from the amendment.
Mr chair which number is this
not only are Representative
Maestas this is not in the book
if you look at the amendment
we're just looking at that
extension by wholesalers.
Well what I'm what I'm doing is
making an amendment that that
section of law repeal act
December thirty one twenty
twenty five.
That.
It's the concern with regards to
the immediacy of the restaurants
correct.
And then it's up to them to
negotiate or not negotiate.
And
around here Representative you
want to weigh in with an opinion
from your own family.
Or not sure.
Alternatively Representative
Maestas since we're this is part
one of a three part series we
can bring this back in the next
part so that we make sure we map
it out correctly the agency Mr
chairman and Senator Ivy Soto
some members of the committee I
would agree with that assessment
Senator Ivey Soto I think we've
all and as the sponsors of this
bill made a commitment to
tackling this issue and multiple
parts this is just to be the
first part and just based on the
discussions we've had Senator
Ivy Soto I think that you know
more a procedural changes
would be better addressed in the
second part of this act right
now we're kind of dealing with
more pressing issues of getting
our restaurants back on their
feet and economic development
where that's more of a
procedural change that that's my
two cents thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I would I would
withdraw the amendment.
Right the minutes withdrawn
Mr chairman the last amendment
that I would make at this time
would be the amendment that was
emailed out to everybody's
legislative address.
from Legislative Council Service
from I think Mr van Gorder
well we've been having our
meeting and it is an omnibus.
Mr chair Senator we skipped one
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry about that.
Senator
Which one did we skip we skipped
the originally suggested by
Senator Griggs corresponds with
the Senate bill two sixty four
of the two oh two is up to two
zero two six five about one in
our books it is the second bill
under the Senator rates are.
section sure in the title in our
she she is closed actually that
is included in the one that I
was just present was it okay
thank you sorry about that Sir
thank you that's correct so.
We
members would check their emails
for the seven page.
The seven page amendments what
this does is it incorporates.
That one from Senator Griggs two
six two point one.
And then if you drop down
towards the bottom of the list.
It incorporates two seven four
point four.
One nine four point two up part
eight only.
Are you eight seven point two
two eight eight point one.
Right three point one three four
five point two.
The six three point two are
changed to twelve hundred
dollars per year for the license
as well as removing the of the
floor House affirmative.
And so basically Mr chairman
what this does
and Alonzo discussion I think we
got.
In Representative gonna be from
enrollment you might would you
please look at the table of
contents we're calling to table
of contents suggested is and you
went through those very quickly
just from the top to the bottom
can you identify which of these
are included in your.
What you're calling her on the
bus yes Sir.
So if you go down.
But one which is listed under
cites the middle one under the
second one Center Greg's name.
Adult clubs.
And includes that one and that
and that amendment allows a
nonprofit.
To be able to use that facility
four times a year instead of two
times a year.
The then if you drop down
towards the bottom.
Of the the one from Senator do
it capitalized and says.
What seven four point four and
what that one does is it allows
people who have purchased a
license and and the last four
years beginning in two thousand
seventeen and concluding of
twenty twenty so the window is
closed.
Be able to move their license
from one county to another as
long as they don't go to
McKinley County and the reason
for that one is because there
are there competitive
environment has changed given
that these additional licenses
are being sold and it gives them
an option this affects around a
dozen licenses
and that will may be used by
about a third of those but it
gives them an option
the
the next one after that allows.
Or
The next one after that the the
the the particular section that
we're looking at.
Allows for the I'm an amendment
number center this little please
what's survey
right up so one nine four point
two and part eight.
And part eight.
What it does is the way that we
have of the B. licenses
structured right now in the bill
is that it is automatic unless a
local option district holds an
election to opt out of the B.
licenses and what this does is
it clarifies that that thirty
two counties are automatically
in unless they have elected
election to opt out McKinley
County as adults of the licenses
unless they hold an election to
opt in.
So that's what number eight
does.
Are of one mind four point two.
The very next one.
Is up to eighty seven point two.
Riled up practice tax breaks and
what that one does is it removes
the one hundred thousand dollar
tax deduction for retail
retailer licenses
are that work that was in the
original additive Rachel bell
that one we leave the
the tax deduction for licensees
for the next four years but it
just removes that hundred
thousand the additional hundred
thousand dollars that was being
done for retailers
Eight eight point one.
Removes the
There was a ten thousand what's.
indoor retail space cap in order
to get anna
In order to obtain an alcoholic
delivery license and so it it
removes the time thousand foot
cat in order to obtain the
alcohol delivery license.
so that it's it's neutral I have
to the actor the it's still has
to be licensed and it's still
all of the all of the due
diligence aspects are still
there.
Three two three point one our.
Allows for
dispenser license to be
transferred out of McKinley
County if people who have just
pencil I since as in McKinley
county would like to leave
McKinley County.
Reporter five points to.
What it does is we allow in the
bill for delivery either we
allow employees of the reach of
the licensee or they can work
with a third party platform such
as door dash to do it but the
language we use what's employees
but oftentimes the star party
platforms and set are there
other people work with them to
be independent contractors so we
just simply change the employees
or independent contractors but
then the other change that we
made was to clarify that the
million dollars of insurance
it's going to be carried by the
platform for the employee or for
the independent contractor so
that so that the the independent
contractor doesn't have to carry
that insurance.
and then and then three six
three.
points up to what that one does
is it allows a restaurant a
license that has been in good
standing for leas twelve
consecutive months.
It would like to pay an
additional with and that's a
beer and light wine license only
and if they'd like to pay an
additional pay a fee of of
twelve hundred dollars per year
they can get a New Mexico
spiritist liquors permits.
that so that this is different
from what we consider before
what we consider before was the
full service restricted the full
service we're not doing that
here what this is a beer and
wine license and we give them
the option of New Mexicos better
liquors if they would like to.
Alternatively they could just
simply upgrade to the full full
of license so so that is the.
restaurants Ferris up permit.
Amendment.
And then
and then being of three house of
four moments one was eight ten
PM.
mandatory closing time for the
B. licenses the second is what
we've already done several times
of removing the inverse sick
lost because it didn't go
through and then the third one
was
a lifetime waiver of license
renewal fees for the life of the
license holder and for
successors in interest of the
license holder if there's
possibly or child a license
holder for certain people look
how the license Representative
subsection C. of sixty eight
sixty to wealth and I just
personally think that a lifetime
waiver of fees is probably that
policy so that would remove that
as well and I do have a notes.
From our Mr van Gorder.
About one nine oh four is one
nine four section eight Mr
Rangel does that not in the.
In the omnibus.
I'm sorry yes section eight is
in the on the buy side the but
the entire one nine four point
two is not section eight is
correct okay yeah the neck if
we've got the on of us with
those very sections are and and
so Mr Chairman I would be able
to Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
are Senator Ivey Soto.
No a lot of this policy stuff is
great we appreciate the
thoughtfulness
There's a couple provisions that
that apparently unfriendly in
particular stripping the house
floor amendment so as a.
An agreement we had with the
minority in the house so we
would
Despite its.
Budget just to tell the this is
unfriendly.
Add up if I could just ask
whether there are other parts
are fine just some of the
affirmative.
Well Mister chairman before I
turned over to Mr Chairman
representative so the before I
turn over to co sponsor Hochman
Vigil it we're we're running
about maybe six to two six
friendly to one family or I
think six to three with the
floor amendments.
We propose that.
The two seven four.
And the three six three the rest
this restaurant a spiritist
permits but we
But all the other stuff we were
we're right up.
Two of deemed friendly.
Thank you Mr including the
McKinley County
The provision I think that's I
think that's really good public
policy that specific to the to
the issues are McKinley County
thank you Mr chairman.
Mr.
Mr chairman Senator Ivy Soto I
may just kind of add additional
explanation on that we're not
opposed to getting rid of the
ten thousand square foot
limitation and we're not opposed
to the movie out of McKinley
County but one of our concerns
we have is you know legislating
for just a particular purpose
are particular type of license
that I don't think that's good
public public policy and kind of
will invite I'm I'm welcome
certainty as to why we're doing
certain things for certain
license holders but if we could
somehow reserves the amendment
in a way where we you know have
the spirit of the public policy
to move licenses are McKinley
County but definitely something
that can be negotiated another
concern I'd like to voice Mr
chairman that Senator Ivy Soto
members of the committee I have
real reservations of of limiting
of the state limiting any type
of ecommerce or our spirit that
we can sell I haven't done a
tremendous amount of research on
this Mr chairman but I I've done
just enough to I have a concern
that any sort of limitation that
the restaurant a license would
provide would possibly violate
the dormant Commerce Commerce
Clause we don't want to invite
that type of certainty as well
thank you Mr chairman okay so
here's the only way I see this
going on
Center Ivy Soto your propose an
omnibus amendment incorporated
several of these I hear the
house members opposing some
accepting some although your
proposed omnibus would have been
efficient to dispense a lot of
these what with there being a
difference of opinion house
members I I'm going to attack
each one of these one by one so
let me let me do this let me go
back up to what I understood was
the first of these amendments on
your table of contents that I
believe you said was
incorporated into your on the
best this would be the amendment
to sixty two point one this is
Senator Griggs nonprofit clubs
is that right that is correct Mr
chairman all right let's take
that particular amendment the.
House members did not I did not
hear the house members opposed
to that amendment that correct
Mr Chairman correct all right is
there any discussion on the
adoption of amendment to sixty
two point one Senator Griggs
nonprofit clubs.
All right is there any objection
the adoption of that amendment.
I see none the final version of
this bill will adopt the
amendment to sixty two point
one.
All clear yep all right the next
one that I saw in your on the
bus Senator Ivey Soto I think
was identified with Senator
Duhigg this is to seventy four
point two cannot be licenses
what I heard the house members
to say is they opposed it is
considered to be and I'm from
the amendment let me confirm
that first of all.
House members is that correct
the two seventy four point four
you consider to be an unfriendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman as written
yes it is on friendly but we do
have some room to grow well
we're we're it's show time
Representative so you have room
to grow but we're gonna vote on
this bill tonight now so I'm
hearing it's unfriendly
amendment let's hear the debate
or discussion on this committee
members with questions on to
seventy four point four Senator
Ivy Soto supports it for the
Senate the house sponsors oppose
it committee members of
questions I see Senator Stewart
and then Senator to hang on this
one amendment please Senator
Stewart Mr chairman it if if I
could just get a another brief
explanation of what it is.
What late Madam approach to the
what this does is that somebody
who purchased a license.
between
two thousand seventeen and two
thousand and twenty would be
permitted to move their license
if they would like to put
different County other as long
as it is not McKinley County.
Up to date and and just very
briefly.
One of the issues that we deal
with it with all of the licenses
if that if the licenses have
been commodity licenses they
have been
they have been extremely
expensive and consider the
personal property of the person
who has gotten the license from
the state what.
Quite candidly most of the folks
I can justify it with the tax
deductions that we're giving
them that they've made their
money.
R. and however the people
purchase a last four years I've
not made their money and it just
simply gives them an option R.
if if it would be financially
beneficial for them to move
their license what county that's
not McKinley right so Mister
chairman I remember this now I I
don't understand why this is
unfriendly that's a long
explanation we can forget about
it.
I'm not quite Mr chair if I may.
I'm Mr chair Senator Senator
Senator Stewart Senator Ivy Soto
forgive me if I'm
misunderstanding this but I
thought that the event was
limited to just take your cannot
be licenses that have been
purchased within that time frame
a for talking about all licenses
I think that alleviates are
concerned.
And Mr chairman and centers
Representative Hochman Vigil as
written it applies to the
capitalize sentences because
frankly it's being the in order
to be able to get to.
The drafted for all the various
different licenses are quite
candidly once a struggle that we
were not going to be able to get
to but actually what it is is
yeah I cannot be licenses that
were replaced by dispenser of
licenses the for calendar year
two thousand eighteen or county
or twenty twenty are excluded.
right and so but then those
those within that time frame are
included in being able to move
from Canada.
Is Mr chairman Senator Ivy Soto
I'm I'm I'm still confused so as
the this the language as written
applied justice cannot be
licenses are to all licenses.
Specifically dispensers light
dispenser licenses that were
exchange within that time frame
as well.
As it it included includes our
generalizes serving capitalizes
of replacement special licenses
during that time.
Okay so it sounds like it's
still I'm sorry Mr chairman
members of the committee it
sounds like it's still limited
to canopy licenses to be.
And if that's the case it would
still be unfriendly Center
storage so for I'm done with the
floor Mr Chairman now you're
you're are we voting on these
one of the times that we've been
doing that's what I'm doing
center I I have which we try to
roll together but because there
was division I'm the law.
It was separately and I also
wanted to give you and the
others the opportunity to
explore each of these a little
bit more detail thank you I
encourage you all doing that all
right that we're doing Senator
do a work on to seventy four
point four three that a fight
with you know you you have the
force are doing.
Thank you Mr chair and and you
know Senator Ivy Soto said a lot
of what I was going going to say
about these are folks who have
gone they they haven't had a
chance to to make their money I
with these licenses because they
have such a short time but the
other thing to keep in mind is
that ninety five percent of
these licenses that we're
talking about R. and Bernalillo
county so allowing this would
actually benefit smaller
counties in the state because
you would see for example those
folks could be moved to Rio
Rancho
or Travis let's hear Sierra this
would actually benefit the other
areas of the state as well
because they wouldn't just be
the same in Bernalillo because
moving outside Bernalillo would
be such a detriment to them
otherwise without this
ammendment.
Thank you other center Moores
who passed Mr.
Second.
The
motion and second wanted to pass
motion four to seventy four
point four.
And we roll call please.
No.
Yes.
Though
so this no.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Hello yes.
No that amendment is adopted.
Mr chairman the next run that on
the list is one ninety four
point two section eight only and
section eight is the section
that allows
It has of the licenses be
automatically approved for local
option districts unless the
district has an election.
To to to prohibit them except
for McKinley County where
they're automatically prohibited
unless they hold a local local
option collection to permit
that.
So we still allow local control
on all three thirty three
counties we just put presumption
as it applies to McKinley.
Mr chair with my signature to
number again.
This is up to two zero one nine
four point two number eight.
How Sanchez from.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivey Soto this is friendly our
bill prohibits restaurant bees
in McKinley county.
But we should give that kind of
the option of if they so choose
to to have those.
One ninety four point two
Representative day open I can
correct Mr chairman right
friendly on the house and Senate
sides further questions or
discussion by committee members.
The past bush referred to pass
and a second by Senator Lopez
and we were on a due pass motion
let's take a roll call please on
one ninety four point two
limited only to section eight
want to make sure chase you're
following this yes hi good the
one.
Yes.
Yes.
Hello yes Representative.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
You yes.
This yes one ninety four point
two section eight only has been
adopted as an amendment to the
committee bill next item up
Senator Ivey Soto next one on
the list to a seven point two
yes our our so this one in the
bill as it came out of the house
I have a one hundred thousand
dollar.
to break a tax deduction for
retailers licenses are I don't
think that's necessary given the
other provisions that are on the
bill and so it would strike that
that provisions of the bill.
House members.
Mister chairman Senator Ivy Soto
it's friendly.
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr chairman Senator risotto
Representative Hochman Vigil my
original bill had a our our
regional bill had a five year
sunset we couldn't sell Lee
served or transfer but since the
provision was taken away and the
other provisions were added.
this is a friendly amendment.
We're good committee members Ron
to eighty seven point two house
and Senate sponsors concur as a
friendly amendment committee
members Senator Moores that hand
that yes Sir our finger it's a
finger and Out yes Mr just I
want to clarify this was the one
that we were actually we're
gonna get would give the current
license holders a hundred
thousand dollars offset their
mocks central revenue for Boston
are you and now we're taking our
waste one a chair on the right.
That number was.
To to to a seven point two.
Representative so those it was a
hundred thousand dollars that
we're going to give them tax
credits that's what it's all
thanks auctions.
Correct.
Thank you more than anything
else.
Okay.
For those of us that moderate
involved perhaps a little bit
more of an explanation there was
originally thought to do a
hundred thousand are tax
deduction you're done is that
you abandon that but I'm still
not clear why what is the reason
for that.
The reason before that changed
if I may thank you Mister
chairman Senator I was at the
centre most so the of the bill
as introduced in the house had a
five year cliff essentially to
create this this is the Economic
transitional period or in five
years a license could not be
sold leased or transferred.
We got the very first committee
and in looking at the bill the
package a license holder is not
affected by the restaurant B. by
the introduction restaurant be
there licenses are going to
maintain their value and
therefore the deduction of.
Probably isn't justified.
Anyone else will you explain
anything different.
What is.
All right we're good all right
other committee members
questions.
But we do passed.
The motion is redo past and
there's a second by Senator
Lopez the
And we will take the role please
on twenty seven point two.
No.
Yes.
Struggle yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
You said no.
No.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Yes two eighty seven point two
is adopted as an amendment in
the committee next item is two
eighty eight point one semi
right Senator Ivey Soto correct
so Mister chairman the fellas
came out of the house if someone
was.
To get a delivery a license they
can only get ability license if
up there was a ten thousand
square foot indoor retail space
cap.
And and so that simply
eliminates the ten thousand foot
and our retail space cap I will
point out that there are some
communities where the only place
that is capable of doing
delivery up is they're they're
they're they're somehow smaller
communities rural communities
where the only place will be
capable would be the local
Albertsons or some other a big
box store romantically we would
like to keep it to only of the
local folks doing this and cut
out the big box folks but but
given the the uniqueness is of
different parts of New Mexico I
just don't think that that is
feasible so that's what this one
is this eliminates the ten
thousand square foot requirement
entirely that is correct right
house members I understood from
your earlier comments this is
unacceptable a favorable
amendment.
I see you Sir Representative
Maestas nodding his head yes.
Present day hoping that's sort
of a non head yes more subtle
than.
Very go all right committee
members with questions on two
eighty eight point one.
Hello Committee Ludu pass.
Motion again a second from
Senator Lopez Emeli a roll call
please on to.
One.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes it's you.
Yes.
All.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
This yes that amendment is
adopted to eighty eight point
one adopted as an amendment in
the committee the next item up I
had was three twenty three point
one.
I'm getting thank you Mr
chairman what three point three
point one does is it allows our
dispensaries and says the
transport out of the local
option district of McKinley
County.
I hear my notes indicate the
house members earlier indicated
this was a friendly amendment
confirm that please Senator
Representative Maestas and hope
on the hill good confirmed
committee members with
questions.
Moved to pass.
Motion and a second from Senator
Lopez and tions or debate on
this proposed amendment to the
I'm sorry three twenty three
point one.
I want to do passed motion Emily
roll call please on.
Three twenty three point one
amendment.
Yes.
Yes.
Photo yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes thank you
yes.
Senator yes.
Amendment three twenty three
point one is adopted by the
committee we're almost done Mr
chairman of the three forty five
point two.
Is one that so this bill of.
That has in in the delivery
provisions that allows a
restaurant hello this is C. to
get a license built in it also
allows them to work with a third
party our delivery service that
that that would have also had to
get a license to do that and
have to they have to comply with
a variety of requirements of the
department the language of the
bill though has the third party.
So if it's if it's a licensee it
has to be an employee of the
license of the does the delivery
if it's a third party they also
use a language licensee but many
of these delivery services
consider the folks who work for
them independent contractors.
Well I'd love to get into the
debate about what's I don't have
a contract with an employee for
this purpose I'd like to stay
neutral and so we say and after
employee we say for independent
contractors but then what we
also do with regard one of the
requirements is that the the
they have to maintain a million
dollars of insurance.
Is that we we clarify that the
million dollars of insurance
that they would maintain on an
employee they have to equally
maintained on an independent
contractor so that it doesn't
fall on the porch left who's
who's considered an independent
contractor ought to have to get
the million dollars of
insurance.
They don't have a note here from
the house members is this
considered to me from here I'm
from the amendment.
Mister chairman Senator Ivy Soto
can I ask a couple clarifying
questions first but with
Senator Ivey Soto are we
defining independent contractor
anywhere and your amendment are
we simply just making a
reference.
Mr chairman and Representative
Hochman Vigil we neither defined
employee nor do we define and.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
Senate Senator Ivy Soto so we're
keeping the language of the
licensee we're simply putting an
additional verbiage making it
clear that the million dollar
policy needs to be held by the
original alcohol license holder
if they're contracting with a
third party money getting not
cracked so the language of the
bill that you have on page
twelve of the bill what you will
see is that there is an option
you can either do it with your
own employee.
Or what you can do is you can
use.
R. someone our.
Your contract with a third party
alcohol delivery service that
third party alcohol delivery
service also has to be licensed
by the department.
That's already in the bill that
that they have to
all the employees of the third
party alcohol delivery service I
have to hold a valid New Mexico
I'll call server Pramik we just
simply insert there or
independent contractor.
So if you're an employee or
independent contractor of the
third party alcohol delivery
service you have to hold a valid
New Mexico I'll call server
permit in order to deliver and
then the current requirement of
the law is proof of general
liability insurance coverage
with the liquor liability
endorsement and I'm out of not
less than one million dollars
per occurrence we just simply
clarify.
That that which endorsement
shall provide coverage for
employees or independent
contractors of the third party
alcohol delivery service.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
Senator Ivy Soto so we're simply
providing for the scenario which
we have the grub hubs or the
door dashes of the world in
which they do not hire employees
they hire independent
contractors you just want to
make sure the similar provisions
in terms apply what is correct
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivey Soto.
House.
Members opinion on the bill on
the amendment.
Mr Chairman Senator Ivey Soto
this is this is friendly but I
also want to defer to senator to
Representative I just make sure
that he's on the same page.
We are we're on the same page
because I differ as well.
All right
Sanchez considered to be
friendly committee members with
questions.
I'm I have I have a question or
two
You can probably appreciate the
the lawyer concern about
liability here.
A couple of questions them
probably center I reset all
direct them to you what happens
if the third party alcohol
delivery service does not
procure the insurance or
maintain it what about lapses or
they failed to procure at.
Appropriations chairman that
would that would then be in
violation of the liquor control
act and they would be subject to
whatever sanctions are would be
forced upon them by the director
of
Rector under RLD.
Well historically that has meant
jeopardizing the license right
the.
In that license at some risk but
that didn't know what we have if
I'm understanding what we're
doing here that won't be much
very much of a concern anymore
my right in other words folks in
the past would make sure that
their servers complied that they
that they were well trained did
a good job with didn't step out
of line because if they did they
might jeopardize a liquor
license worth half a million
dollars or more most of my
question here is how do we
enforce.
This provision the requirement
of insurance.
Mr chairman and members so the
refreshment of Insurance already
exists in the bill.
so that is not a new requirement
the the only thing is that we
are we are providing that that
is the third party platform has
to have the insurance that we're
we're not expecting pandemic
contractor to maintain insurance
and I understand that goal and I
support that goal but I'm trying
to jerk up billions so if the
third party alcohol delivery
service has coverage does the
does the alcohol seller also
have coverage.
yes.
Yep because they will have
coverage as a result of the
eight million dollar insurance
general liability insurance
policy will not call I don't
have coverage through the
general liability policy with
the million dollar alcohol
endorsement that would be on
that of policy that's required
in the bill other than through
the amendment process that is
correct that is already required
in the bill what are the
consequences for failure to do
so.
R. Mr Chairman so what the
thank.
Well the first half with bill do
so again is that it would be a
violation of the liquor control
act as I indicated before the
second is that they would
Lucas the stand to lose their
third party alcohol delivery
license and then delivery
service license give me and then
the third thing is because of
the language that we're putting
into this ammendment if there
were liability if something did
happen and they didn't have the
insurance I think the clear
public policy is that the state
of New Mexico expects the
platform to be on the hook not
the independent contractor for
the for the damages.
Mr chairman Senator Ivey said if
I may also add one of the first
sections of the delivery portion
of the bill does state that
whoever that delivery services
our licensees have to be
delivering from a source that
has a liquor license to begin
with so there are certain
liabilities that flow through
through that arrangement as well
from an enforcement and a
liability perspective.
And I appreciate that
explanation might challenges
always industry my practice of
all times whose coverage is
gonna be a primer.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
said I think the primary
coverage is going to be on that
of the the delivery license
holder who has requirement
through this bill to have a one
million dollar liability policy
in place.
Senator Senator doing the job
I'll come to you lost your
trying to get in on something
that needs to be heard right
now.
Well it is on this point Mr
chair because I think you need
to look at page thirteen of the
bill subsection L. starting of
line three where it specifically
says that the third party
delivery folks are independently
liable for under address I'm
shocked claim so I think that
that needs to be part of this
consideration.
I appreciate you point that out
to me I don't know that it
really addresses what I'm trying
to get to the that they're
independently liable that that
means our independently liable
of the south and sellers of one
of them are liable.
independently but I I'm still
left with a question of who
would have the primary coverage
here but I I I I don't think we
have to resolve that here today
just it seems like it's no
certainty to maybe some all
right other questions.
Yes.
Mr chairman I think just a tort
law perspective liability and
and primary viability will be
determined on on the parties so
whoever it was who failed to
meet the standard of you know
checking required ID and and
delivering alcohol in a manner
that was safe and prudent you
would have a state case against
them independently and then you
can also join other parties as
well for secondary liability.
And you know reinsurance.
Okay very good all right other
committee members questions.
Anything else all right do pass
motion that's a forty five point
two Ivey Soto.
Senator Stewart with the second.
Three forty five point two Emily
roll call please.
No.
Yes.
Photo yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
No.
Senator pro.
No.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
And then do passed of three
forty five.
You're much Mr chairman Mr
chairman of the next one is
three sixty three point two.
Although in the packet there was
one aspect of it that was
amended allegiance through that
it's a simple one so what this
does a restaurant a license is
not be online license R. what
this does is it allows eight
restaurant a licensee that has
been good standing prepared of
at least twelve consecutive
months part of payment of a of a
fee of twelve hundred dollars
that is a change twelve hundred
dollars that they may also get a
New Mexico spiritus liquors
comment.
The New Mexico press liquor
permit them in addition to being
allow to to sell beer and wine
as authorized by the restaurant
a license the restaurant in New
Mexico press look a permit will
entitle them to also serve
someone serve
spirits liquor produced a bottle
in New Mexico this is there's a
there's an important distinction
between this and what we did
last Friday I would say someone
improvident late.
And that is that the the
restaurant being Lysons is a
full service license the
restaurant a license is a beer
and wine license we're not
creating a license that
restricts but we are creating a
permit but then that license
that restricts.
When you look at the cost
structure as well.
To do this because they are New
Mexico a license as a thirteen
hundred dollar your license so
then you end up if you do the
permit would be twenty five
hundred dollars that is actually
the low level of the B. license.
So we so the dormant Commerce
Commerce Clause with would come
into a fact if we are
restricting options to those
that don't allow
of drugs across state lines but
we're not restricting options by
doing it this way we're
providing an opportunity and
that's a fundamental difference
between what happened on Friday
with with restricting of options
and what we're doing in this one
which is providing an
opportunity in terms of an
enhancement on a beer and wine
license and a structure where if
someone wants to they can just
simply get the full service
license actually for the same
price that they're if they are a
small store thank you.
The
The notes I have indicate that
the house Sanchez initially
indicated this was an unfriendly
amendment let me check again
with you today I have my nose
correctly and is that your
position.
I'm thank you Mr chairman
Senator Ivy Soto where I do
appreciate the explanation I do
agree that it is better and that
we may not be skirting and
dormant Commerce Clause issue I
still feel that that amendment
would be protectionist in nature
whereas what we're trying to do
is we're trying to spur economic
development in every in every
way that we can and you know if
if if we have restaurant a
license holders who can sell
spirit is alcohol for whatever
it was twenty three hundred
Bucks verses getting the full
restaurant be license my fear
would be that they're they're
just gonna offer the twenty
three hundred dollars rather
than for the the the full
license but I I defer to my co
sponsor.
The thank thank you Mr Chairman
representative Hochman Vigil
representative I sort of so this
this would be unfriendly we
appreciate the the sponsor may
keep maintaining the integrity
of the of the restaurant be
license you know this bill hack
has your your and one license
and and you can modify it and
have a beer and wine and spirits
license and that's what we want
for our restaurants the
distillers this creates a lot of
customers for local distilleries
they can market their spirit
statewide hopefully with the
dozens of new restaurants and
the restaurant can say you know
we sell.
New Mexico distilled spirits but
to have that distinction
I understand the policy what
we're it's it's it would be
unfair.
Right we've got the house
members are doing this to me and
I'm from the amendment committee
members with questions.
Is the ones that make Senator
Stewart.
And to think hard.
That Sanchez on both sides
questions committee members.
Closure the committee then.
Would pass are.
The motion is to pass their
Moores second from.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Your we'll do a roll call vote
on this proposed amendment.
Emily please.
Yes.
Yes.
Hello yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez no.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes the amendment is adopted.
That's the three sixty three
point two my notes indicate that
the remaining items that we have
on this bill about quarter to
seven are the floor amendment is
that right that is correct Mr
chairman and the work
requirement for members one of
them has already been revealed
through the other amendments so
we can very quickly dispensed
with I think let me start with
one moment number three if I
want a four member number two my
member number three is our it
gives a
lifetime.
Waiver of fees for the lifetime
of the license holder and for
successors in interest if the
that's possibly part of the
license holder for certain
license folders the
policy I don't think a lifetime
waiver of fees for a lot for a
license is something we should
be doing.
Right and I understood earlier
the house members oppose
elimination of house floor
member number three is that
correct.
Correct all right so they
consider this to be and I'm from
the moment Senator Ivey Soto is
the motion is to strike house
for enrollment number three is
that correct sorry so as well.
I'll second the amendment
discussion committee members if
I may Mister chairman yes but
thank you Mr chairman members of
the the.
The point of the the ten o'clock
closure was to create space
between the in our locals.
We.
The.
The anyway that are we talking
about the the floor house floor
equipment we lowered the the
fight last call so to speak from
eleven o'clock to ten o'clock in
us to create space between the
restaurant be licenses which are
new one out on that one we're
not on that once their money
runs.
Enter local license waiver
Representative thank you.
We're on we're on though yeah
what fees waiver right.
Yes Representative mate
committee members the motion is
to strike House foreman number
three any other discussion.
pleasure of the committee center
Ivey Soto has been that's a
motion to strike all of the
second some of the motion to
strike a four member number
three any further discussion.
Family please give us a roll
call on the motion.
No.
Senator do yes.
Photo.
Senator Lopez yes.
So.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes yes yes I'm sorry Senator
Pirtle ****.
Thank.
Senator no.
Right of the committee has
adopted.
I can House foreman number
three.
Our offices are we got a house
program number one house
amendment number one has
restaurant B. licensees
I have to see service at ten PM.
or whatever they sees eight
sales what not and
and it restricts them to serve
infection among three drinks.
and so are.
Up I I think that we should that
this one should be struck
frankly because my experience
with early
last call times is it causes
people to order one last right
that they may or may not have
ordered and then they have to
leave soon and they try to log
it just before the lease.
And so that ends up being a bad
policy in terms of
of what happens when people
leave the establishment.
Right so the amount of the
motion but from Santo every sort
of strike house floor amendment
number one out of here when we
hear from the house Sanchez is
the proposed amendment friendly
or unfriendly.
And if I may Mister chairman
Senator Ivy Soto it's unfriendly
for a couple different reasons
I'll I'll defer to two of
Representative masses to explain
why we need differentiation and
space between any restaurant be
license and our distillers the
very important distinction to
maintain and I will go ahead and
explain that I I think that
we're as we're as I understand
Senator Ivey Soto is coming from
last call last call whether or
not it's at ten PM or later
people are gonna order that last
drink and try that one way or
another so you know whether or
not we have it earlier or later
I I don't think that that is
really relevant distinction but
where it does become relevant
relevant is is how were allowing
different license holders to
have different religions and and
on that point I'll defer to
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr chairman program off of the
hill Representative I Senator so
this is on from the I I
mentioned earlier I jumped the
gun the policy reason for this
amendment on the house floor was
to create.
Space and distance between the
inner localizes which were
cognisant of of their market
value fluctuation and the
restaurant be this amendment on
the house floor allows you to
buy it you know to order a drink
at nine fifty nine you're not
getting kicked out you can stay
eating dinner till ten thirty
eleven or whatnot but in those
inner locals concert you know
can have nice steak houses or
whatever open till two o'clock
but.
We this is a new new license to.
And we thought it was reasonable
to but if you want the
restaurant be your restaurant
cannot.
You know cannot receive an order
passed ten.
Right to the house members
consider the proposed amendment
or the amendment before the
committee the unfriendly
discussion on the proposed
amendment Senator doing.
Thank you Mr chair again if if
what is something we're trying
to do right now is support our
restaurant industry and and not
limit their ability to to be
profitable I I think that this
floor amendment does the
opposite of that so.
Senator Stewart.
So.
I I'm getting tired but.
What what do we do with what
Senator when you tell me your
tired you know what I do yeah if
you use the yeah you in the
committee I'm not that tired
lost once.
You're free when you say that
okay I'm not tired I'm just very
happy and lives in the wake what
are we doing with a licenses do
they have this provision.
What you know the Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivy Soto Senator so
So getting out of the tax that
getting out of the tax revenue
committee in the house of the
the restaurant be licenses have
the same restrictions as the
restaurant or the very one
licenses which is now a
restaurant a upon passage sixty
sixty percent food E. L. you
know you you can't you can't you
have to close at eleven well you
can't sell you know bear in mind
after eleven but what this new
restaurant bees it we on the
house floor I propose an
amendment to a lower it from
eleven to ten the restaurant be
still have the same restrictions
as the beer and wine as it
relates to food and and other
restrictions.
And if I may if I may add Mr
chairman.
On that point.
I'm AT also we want to be
careful because with the
addition of the restaurant type
the license we still want to
have an incentive for people to
purchase the distiller license
are in on enter local license
and so essentially if we allow
restaurants to to serve the same
way of our can we're turning
restaurants and bars and there's
no reason to purchase any other
type of restaurant of license
I'd rather than a restaurant
type B..
Senator Stewart I would just
point out on page twenty five of
the bill.
If you look online to page forty
five you'll see the restaurant a
license which is the which
airline.
They shall cease at eleven PM.
What line are you on.
What I want to okay yes yeah if
you look at page twenty six line
twelve.
This was the original language
for restaurant be if we remove
House foreman number one it
would revert to the same time as
for restaurant a so they would
be aligned.
All right thank you Mr chairman
thank you other committee
members with questions on the
proposed settlement before the
courthouse foreman number one.
No other discussion or question.
We have a due pass motion by
Senator Ivey Soto and a second
from.
Senator do.
Am going to call the roll
please.
Well.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
Senator Lopez.
No.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Yes.
Yes.
This yes the amendment is
adopted.
Mr chairman of the less any
member is seeking the floor for
further discussion I would move
a do pass on how snacks and
Revenue is it action running.
I'll fax and Revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill two
fifty five as variously amended
by this committee.
Mr Chairman I'm so sorry to
interrupt I'm can I just make on
a quick points our quick ask a
quick question.
Question yes a point no.
Question I'm Mr chairman of
Senator Ivey Soto I believe we
had some additional amendments
that were given to us by the by
the RLD liquor director any by
hosts the ending in one nine
four point to just catch up
cleanup through various minutes
apart on to the house are we not
R. as the committee not going to
consider those equipment at this
time we are not.
Representative Representative
Representative I'm sorry
Representative vote of if there
are proposed members there has
to be a sponsor on the
committee.
The proposed amendments and so
Mr violence may have amendments
but if there's not a committee
member proposing them they're
not gonna be considered by the
committee Senator and we're Mr
chairman we did adopt part of
those Representative.
All right
so the Senator Lopez.
There we go Mr Chairman I'm just
a couple of quick questions on
the bill itself if I may ask for
clarification.
Mr Chairman our representatives
on page sixty six I wanted to
make sure online thirteen it
says it is unnecessary to ask
for an identity document of that
person clearly looks older than
thirty five years of age.
Mr chairman when you're
purchasing liquor at a
restaurant you have to still
show your identification.
Yes yes.
Mr Chairman so why are we taking
it out I mean I I as a
compliment if you know I guess
if they still look for my ID
when I could err restaurant but
if you look over the age of
thirty five Mr chairman I'm just
curious as to why we took that
out is this is for the delivery
purposes.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez if
I may but this was actually one
of the amendments that was
considered from the RLD director
because it was at policy it was
contradictory policy to what it
was we were going to be
expecting in promulgating rules
for for delivery so it's a
salient point it should be
addressed thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman because I
think it should
we should have a differentiation
if you're in a restaurant and
they still chart you you should
still be carted if they deliver
to your home just a comment and
that concern Mr chairman and
then I do have one more question
Mr chairman I'm for the delivery
purposes there's this is there's
no sense that on it this is like
for ever Mr Chairman
representative.
What.
Okay and if I may ask why.
Mr Chairman said representatives
would be able to Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez so we actually have a lot
of
data and experience of regards
to alcohol delivery I know that
there are some arguments that
state that you know we could be
delivering alcohol to you know
miners are are college kids and
college parties but there's
actually a reason why mothers
against drunk driving have not
taken a position on this bill
and that's because delivery
alcohol delivery has been proven
to reduce do you have your eyes
because people are staying home
we are promulgating rules and
policies that require that those
that are purchasing alcohol to
delivery prove their identity
prove that they are of age if
they appear intoxicated in any
way the delivery in the sale
sale will be refused so this is
actually a manner in which the
state of New Mexico and are the
can sees back more control over
the you know the alcohol the
delivery process in the sales of
alcohol it's much preferred
state to what the state
experience with drive up windows
which we now have ended up in
tragedy and everything that we
can do to keep people from
getting in their vehicles and
going to purchase alcohol for
just more alcohol is a good
thing for the state.
Mr Chairman representative on
that point to I wish we could
stop gas stations from selling
package liquors and the little
minis because people also go
there and put gas grab a six
pack or whatever size you get
some of those minis pop it open
as they're driving away Mr
Chairman eyes I I was one of
several of us who voted to close
drive up liquors back in
nineteen ninety eight and you
know it made a difference in my
community and yeah that's just
part of what I was asking why
there's no sense that on this
because I remember it was
proposed in the public this was
to help our small businesses are
restaurants to help make ends
meet that they could you have
some extra income and it was how
did at that point in time Mr
Chairman representative since
Senator Ivy Soto that this was
just for
to be in a limited time so I
know it's change but I just
wanted to ask those questions
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Lopez any further.
Anyone else in the committee I'm
gonna make sure we get the
motion right but before we do
just yet observation there
center Lopez I'm all continue to
watch with some interest the
last couple weeks of the session
one of the bills that I think
will be perhaps interesting to
this committee will be coming
our way on recreational
marijuana and of I will always
be somewhat puzzled Center Lopez
by your points which is we've
done so much to restrict alcohol
we we talk a great deal about
restricting alcohol and driving
drive through windows hours of
limitation days of restriction
and so forth and we've never
made the argument that it is in
our interest for tax revenue to
be trying to expand on alcohol
sales because of the end of the
argument is to be made
recreational marijuana we're
we're doing so to maximize tax
revenues and diversify our
economy we should really be
opening up a drive through
windows and that allowing
alcohol sales as many hours in
as many days as possible if
that's the if that's the agenda
is to maximize tax revenue but
that's a little bit beyond the
point of the bill tonight.
For now the bill and I think
Senator Ivy Soto ask is to state
the motion and maybe say it
properly but I think the motion
is to strike all of tech house
tax revenue committee substitute
for House Bill two fifty five as
amended strike the bill in its
entirety from the house and do
passed a Senate Judiciary
Committee amendments to house
revenue taxation committee
substitute for two to two fifty
five.
Is that what we need to do for
the J. chase on make sure you
know what we're doing and and
make sure we're abundantly clear
we're going to we're going to
get a clean bill that will be
your of described by title as a
Senate Judiciary
amendments to the house bill not
a sub but as amendments.
So I was saying chase three
come.
Translate what I'm.
Mr chairman for chase and that
is.
So that people don't have to go
back and forth look a even
though we will have amendments
in context that what we will
report out of the committee
would report out actively a
clean bill we normally that be a
committee substitute buses from
the second chamber we're going
to do it as an amendments so
basically we would strike.
In the bill from page one lying
you know whatever eleven or or
or twenty one through page sixty
eight line eighteen and I'm
sorry in lieu thereof.
An additional sixty eight pages
that would lay everything out
with all of the members we have
done or lated with that.
K. are you with us you're
looking puzzled.
I am now with you.
Sorry it took me awhile to catch
on so they'll be one huge
amendment.
After whatever the first page of
your changing.
That's correct.
My goal is to not have eight ten
pages of amendments that people
have to then go back and forth
to try and insert or reconcile
but rather to have a product
that somebody can read front to
back and and make it
comprehensible by adoption of
these amendments tonight.
Mr Chairman the one the one
thing that I would point out as
a potential plan do it meant is
that if someone were to attempt
to do floor amendments.
The only way that I think under
current process that they could
go for enrollment would be to
repeal the entirety of house of
the Senate Judiciary Committee
amendment number one.
And then restate the whole thing
with the with whatever change
they wanted in the affirmative
whereas with if we do it let's
hear and the moments in contact
for people can follow it it
makes it easier if somebody
needs to do a I think the
important.
Well Senator Ivey Soto legislate
I'll let you state the motion as
you choose Senator wants to get
in on the discussion to
electrical issue strategically
do it Senator Ivey Soto it would
seem to me that the sponsors and
you want to discourage for
amendments although I know you
all would love to continue
working on this for another
couple of days but I I assume
that the that you would want to
discourage for members but the
I'll let you state the motion as
you choose to in a moment
Senator Stewart is as we
recognize Senator.
Well Mr chairman I.
I'll wait to hear what the
motion as I still think that the
motion is to pass on house bill
two fifty five as amended.
you know the house taxation
committee substitute for two
fifty five as amended even if it
the entire bill is an amendment
but you know I'll I'll listen to
what Senator Ivey Soto saying.
And then I'll wait for that
motion sensor madam I concern is
as you stated the motion that
would be like any other motion
we make for passage of a bill
with amendments and and then you
might just get a page you might
just get eight pages of of
paragraphs of listed amendments
with with the motion you
describing right order as well
make sure chase centers as we're
doing let's just call it what it
is we're we're doing a committee
substitute but we're not gonna
call it a Senate judiciary ****
Committee substitute the voided
having to go back into the
house.
That's really what we're doing.
Right right.
Chairman of the committee just
one hundred and one of you have
to actually have to amendments
one would be to strike the floor
amendment the house floor
amendments the other would be to
do the argument so they're
actually two amendments.
Therapy so does your motion.
Mr Chairman our.
My.
The fact that we have a menacing
context my motion is that we are
to pass on house taxation
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
very easily amended by the
Senate sure.
Understood you're gonna you're
gonna get the.
The Frankenstein version yes
yes.
All right.
Mr Chairman there is an
amendment to the chairman of the
finance committee is interested
in making when it gets to the
floor if it were not for that
from my knowledge of that
amendment I would have
voluntarily.
Yeah I understand that and while
I appreciate that you're right
that we now receive amendments
in context that assumes that
everybody on the floor will be
have those and we look at those
and so forth as we go along with
that but the Dodgers built your
motion Center so I'll take it
the way you you're presenting
it.
Are you you all know this is not
my preference in the committee
but but I understand we're in
unusual times now so of.
That's the that's the matter
before the committee will do a
roll call vote on the bill and
the motion as presented trace
you'll know what you're doing.
Yes all right very good Emily
roll call please.
No.
Senator do yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez no.
Senator Wirth wait now.
Senator pro.
It's not.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator this.
Yes I for two passed.
yeah would you passed Committee
members I believe that completes
the order of business for the
evening K. I. C. raising a
finger that worries me before we
all go.
Let me go ahead to make sure
that we're we're doing the the
amendments and basically us
again.
Two two zero four two seven
point one the on the bus then
also not all of those past.
actually.
Know fast.
There is one additional
amendments to consider Moores
from sunset retailers surtax so
we.
Two two zero four two seven
point one one two two zero three
one two point one which was
senator Morris Sunset me terror
researcher Texans at we would
appreciate if you would not
settle him with credit for that
so that would be on me.
Right.
There was no support I I I'm not
sure what I just heard you say
chase but but the senator Morris
wholesale extension of credit
was that in the on the nose it
was I'm sorry we couldn't make
clear you would be will be on
the bill everything in your
bills only on this investment
was passed in addition.
The past two two zero three one
two point one which sunsets the
retailer surtax.
Yes that is correct the the that
that is three one two point one
correct.
Yes correct yes that is correct
Sir.
And all the other amendments
either failed or not present.
Yes.
Give me that give me the number
again traced on the one that you
said it was a sense that.
That is option two zero two
three two point one.
What's the one that some subset
of the of the up to percent tax
for years.
That's right.
And that was that was adopted
what's.
Got it that is correct that's
not in the omnibus that is
correct.
I've got it and then and then
chasing addition obviously to
what's in the omnibus the it did
the opposite mom of us include
the house floor amendments
instruct.
Yes yes okay all right we'll
wait to see that.
I'll be very straight with you
all will have a committee report
but it's going to wait on the
chase in a maybe a little bit of
time and when we get the
committee report we want to look
at it very very closely all
right hi declares Representative
Maestas just wanted to chime in
real quick thank you so much I
Mr chairman for your leadership
on all members a great
suggestions great Canadian great
bill the best part is this
committee is the most emphatic
with their yeas and nays in the.
Representative representative
movie lastest Ewing seen nothing
yet here you this is the first
house bill
and just wait what we have in
store for you for our last two
weeks you're going to see lots
of emphatic yeas and nays on
house bills don't you worry so
Mister chairman let's recognize
though it's it's senator Morris
is Senator Pirtle that are
leading the way with that
emphatic yeses and nos.
Well what I would suggest you
that's a good point center Madam
pro tem and and also I I think
that we should at least
recognize I think center Moores
that R. Pirtle Sir Baca had some
influence on the drafting and
crafting of this legislation
there amendments may not have
been adopted but I know there's
been a lot of discussion when
debate between them and the
sponsors and that's good that
you all that that time outside
the committee and and came at
least an understanding maybe not
agreement but at least an
understanding so thank you will
stand in recess we'll see you
all on Friday Saturday and
possibly Sunday please look at
the agenda is changing quickly
and I'll and I'll visit with
Senator Pirtle about perhaps
getting some agreement on making
some additions to amendments to
the agenda on short notice all
right.
Senator Pirtle thank you
goodnight thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee chairman.
